A nuclear reactor, formerly known as an atomic pile, is a device used to initiate and control a self-sustained nuclear chain reaction. Nuclear reactors are used at nuclear power plants for electricity generation and in nuclear marine propulsion. Heat from nuclear fission is passed to a working fluid (water or gas), which in turn runs through steam turbines. These either drive a ship's propellers or turn electrical generators' shafts. Nuclear generated steam in principle can be used for industrial process heat or for district heating. Some reactors are used to produce isotopes for medical and industrial use, or for production of weapons-grade plutonium. As of early 2019, the IAEA reports there are 454 nuclear power reactors and 226 nuclear research reactors in operation around the world. Just as conventional thermal power stations generate electricity by harnessing the thermal energy released from burning fossil fuels, nuclear reactors convert the energy released by controlled nuclear fission into thermal energy for further conversion to mechanical or electrical forms. When a large fissile atomic nucleus such as uranium-235 or plutonium-239 absorbs a neutron, it may undergo nuclear fission. The heavy nucleus splits into two or more lighter nuclei, (the fission products), releasing kinetic energy, gamma radiation, and free neutrons. A portion of these neutrons may be absorbed by other fissile atoms and trigger further fission events, which release more neutrons, and so on. This is known as a nuclear chain reaction. To control such a nuclear chain reaction, neutron poisons and neutron moderators can change the portion of neutrons that will go on to cause more fission.[3] Nuclear reactors generally have automatic and manual systems to shut the fission reaction down if monitoring detects unsafe conditions. The reactor core gene A nuclear reactor coolant — usually water but sometimes a gas or a liquid metal (like liquid sodium) or molten salt — is circulated past the reactor core to absorb the heat that it generates. The heat is carried away from the reactor and is then used to generate steam. Most reactor systems employ a cooling system that is physically separated from the water that will be boiled to produce pressurized steam for the turbines, like the pressurized water reactor. However, in some reactors the water for the steam turbines is boiled directly by the reactor core; for example, the boiling water reactor rates heat in a number of ways. The rate of fission reactions within a reactor core can be adjusted by controlling the quantity of neutrons that are able to induce further fission events. Nuclear reactors typically employ several methods of neutron control to adjust the reactor's power output. Some of these methods arise naturally from the physics of radioactive decay and are simply accounted for during the reactor's operation, while others are mechanisms engineered into the reactor design for a distinct purpose. The fastest method for adjusting levels of fission-inducing neutrons in a reactor is via movement of the control rods. Control rods are made of neutron poisons and therefore tend to absorb neutrons. When a control rod is inserted deeper into the reactor, it absorbs more neutrons than the material it displaces—often the moderator. This action results in fewer neutrons available to cause fission and reduces the reactor's power output. Conversely, extracting the control rod will result in an increase in the rate of fission events and an increase in power. The physics of radioactive decay also affects neutron populations in a reactor. One such process is delayed neutron emission by a number of neutron-rich fission isotopes. These delayed neutrons account for about 0.65% of the total neutrons produced in fission, with the remainder (termed "prompt neutrons") released immediately upon fission. The fission products which produce delayed neutrons have half lives for their decay by neutron emission that range from milliseconds to as long as several minutes, and so considerable time is required to determine exactly when a reactor reaches the critical point. Keeping the reactor in the zone of chain-reactivity where delayed neutrons are necessary to achieve a critical mass state allows mechanical devices or human operators to control a chain reaction in "real time"; otherwise the time between achievement of criticality and nuclear meltdown as a result of an exponential power surge from the normal nuclear chain reaction, would be too short to allow for intervention. This last stage, where delayed neutrons are no longer required to maintain criticality, is known as the prompt critical point. There is a scale for describing criticality in numerical form, in which bare criticality is known as zero dollars and the prompt critical point is one dollar, and other points in the process interpolated in cents. In some reactors, the coolant also acts as a neutron moderator. A moderator increases the power of the reactor by causing the fast neutrons that are released from fission to lose energy and become thermal neutrons. Thermal neutrons are more likely than fast neutrons to cause fission. If the coolant is a moderator, then temperature changes can affect the density of the coolant/moderator and therefore change power output. A higher temperature coolant would be less dense, and therefore a less effective moderator. In other reactors the coolant acts as a poison by absorbing neutrons in the same way that the control rods do. In these reactors power output can be increased by heating the coolant, which makes it a less dense poison. Nuclear reactors generally have automatic and manual systems to scram the reactor in an emergency shut down. These systems insert large amounts of poison (often boron in the form of boric acid) into the reactor to shut the fission reaction down if unsafe conditions are detected or anticipated. Most types of reactors are sensitive to a process variously known as xenon poisoning, or the iodine pit. The common fission product Xenon-135 produced in the fission process acts as a neutron poison that absorbs neutrons and therefore tends to shut the reactor down. Xenon-135 accumulation can be controlled by keeping power levels high enough to destroy it by neutron absorption as fast as it is produced. Fission also produces iodine-135, which in turn decays (with a half-life of 6.57 hours) to new xenon-135. When the reactor is shut down, iodine-135 continues to decay to xenon-135, making restarting the reactor more difficult for a day or two, as the xenon-135 decays into cesium-135, which is not nearly as poisonous as xenon-135, with a half-life of 9.2 hours. This temporary state is the "iodine pit." If the reactor has sufficient extra reactivity capacity, it can be restarted. As the extra xenon-135 is transmuted to xenon-136, which is much less a neutron poison, within a few hours the reactor experiences a "xenon burnoff (power) transient". Control rods must be further inserted to replace the neutron absorption of the lost xenon-135. Failure to properly follow such a procedure was a key step in the Chernobyl disaster. Reactors used in nuclear marine propulsion especially nuclear submarines often cannot be run at continuous power around the clock in the same way that land-based power reactors are normally run, and in addition often need to have a very long core life without refuelling. For this reason many designs use highly enriched uranium but incorporate burnable neutron poison in the fuel rods.[10] This allows the reactor to be constructed with an excess of fissionable material, which is nevertheless made relatively safe early in the reactor's fuel burn-cycle by the presence of the neutron-absorbing material which is later replaced by normally produced long-lived neutron poisons (far longer-lived than xenon-135) which gradually accumulate over the fuel load's operating life. The energy released in the fission process generates heat, some of which can be converted into usable energy. A common method of harnessing this thermal energy is to use it to boil water to produce pressurized steam which will then drive a steam turbine that turns an alternator and generates electricity. The neutron was discovered in 1932 by British physicist James Chadwick. The concept of a nuclear chain reaction brought about by nuclear reactions mediated by neutrons was first realized shortly thereafter, by Hungarian scientist Leo Szilard, in 1933. He filed a patent for his idea of a simple reactor the following year while working at the Admiralty in London However, Szilard’s idea did not incorporate the idea of nuclear fission as a neutron source, since that process was not yet discovered. Szilard’s ideas for nuclear reactors using neutron-mediated nuclear chain reactions in light elements proved unworkable. Nuclear reactors are the heart of a nuclear power plant. They contain and control nuclear chain reactions that produce heat through a physical process called fission. That heat is used to make steam that spins a turbine to create electricity. With more than 450 commercial reactors worldwide, including 98 in the United States, nuclear power continues to be one of the largest sources of reliable carbon-free electricity available. The main job of a reactor is to house and control nuclear fission—a process where atoms split and release energy. Fission and Fusion: What is the Difference? Reactors use uranium for nuclear fuel. The uranium is processed into small ceramic pellets and stacked together into sealed metal tubes called fuel rods. Typically, more than 200 of these rods are bundled together to form a fuel assembly. A reactor core is typically made up of a couple hundred assemblies, depending on power level. Inside the reactor vessel, the fuel rods are immersed in water which acts as both a coolant and moderator. The moderator helps slow down the neutrons produced by fission to sustain the chain reaction. Control rods can then be inserted into the reactor core to reduce the reaction rate or withdrawn to increase it. The heat created by fission turns the water into steam, which spins a turbine to produce carbon-free electricity. All commercial nuclear reactors in the United States are light-water reactors. This means they use normal water as both a coolant and neutron moderator. There are two types of light-water reactors operating in America. More than 65% of the commercial reactors in the United States are pressurized-water reactors or PWRs. These reactors pump water into the reactor core under high pressure to prevent the water from boiling. The water in the core is heated by nuclear fission and then pumped into tubes inside a heat exchanger. Those tubes heat a separate water source to create steam. The steam then turns an electric generator to produce electricity. The core water cycles back to the reactor to be reheated and the process is repeated. More than 65% of the commercial reactors in the United States are pressurized-water reactors or PWRs. These reactors pump water into the reactor core under high pressure to prevent the water from boiling. The water in the core is heated by nuclear fission and then pumped into tubes inside a heat exchanger. Those tubes heat a separate water source to create steam. The steam then turns an electric generator to produce electricity. The core water cycles back to the reactor to be reheated and the process is repeated. Chain reactions of fissionable materials can be controlled and sustained without an explosion in a nuclear reactor. Any nuclear reactor that produces power via the fission of uranium or plutonium by bombardment with neutrons must have at least five components: nuclear fuel consisting of fissionable material, a nuclear moderator, reactor coolant, control rods, and a shield and containment system. The reactor works by separating the fissionable nuclear material such that a critical mass cannot be formed, controlling both the flux and absorption of neutrons to allow shutting down the fission reactions. In a nuclear reactor used for the production of electricity, the energy released by fission reactions is trapped as thermal energy and used to boil water and produce steam. The steam is used to turn a turbine, which powers a generator for the production of electricity. A Light-Water Nuclear Fission Reactor for the Production of Electric Power. The fuel rods are made of a corrosion-resistant alloy that encases the partially enriched uranium fuel; controlled fission of 235U in the fuel produces heat. Water surrounds the fuel rods and moderates the kinetic energy of the neutrons, slowing them to increase the probability that they will induce fission. Control rods that contain elements such as boron, cadmium, or hafnium, which are very effective at absorbing neutrons, are used to control the rate of the fission reaction. A heat exchanger is used to boil water in a secondary cooling system, creating steam to drive the turbine and produce electricity. The sizeable hyperbolic cooling tower, which is the most visible portion of the facility, condenses the steam in the secondary cooling circuit; it is often located at some distance from the actual reactor. Naturally occurring uranium is composed almost totally of two uranium isotopes. It contains more than  99%  uranium-238 and less than  1%  uranium-235. It is the uranium-235. However, that is fissionable (will undergo fission). For uranium to be used as fuel in a fission reactor, the percentage of uranium-235 must be increased, usually to about  3% . (Uranium in which the  U -235 content is more than  1%  is called enriched uranium.)The enriched UF6 gas is collected, cooled until it solidifies, and then taken to a fabrication facility where it is made into fuel assemblies. Each fuel assembly consists of fuel rods that contain many thimble-sized, ceramic-encased, enriched uranium (usually UO2) fuel pellets. Modern nuclear reactors may contain as many as 10 million fuel pellets. The amount of energy in each of these pellets is equal to that in almost a ton of coal or 150 gallons of oil. Once the supply of  U -235 is acquired, it is placed in a series of long cylindrical tubes called fuel rods. These fuel cylinders are bundled together with control rods made of neutron-absorbing material. The amount of  U -235 in all the fuel rods taken together is adequate to carry on a chain reaction but is less than the critical mass. Neutrons produced by nuclear reactions move too fast to cause fission (Figure  7.3.4 ). For efficient collisions to occur, a moderator must be used to slow the speeds of the neutrons. Moderators can be composed of many different types of chemical substances.  The first experimental nuclear reactors  used high-purity graphite (or carbon) as a moderator.  Today, many countries use light water (LW) as moderators.  Otherwise known as H2O, this substance needs to in large supply.  Most LW reactors are built near lakes or other fresh water sources.   Depending of the type of fuel, a country would select a corresponding moderator for determining wattage output.  Other types of moderators that are used today include:   heavy water (HW which is D2O), carbon dioxide, beryllium, or graphite. A nuclear reactor coolant is used to carry the heat produced by the fission reaction to an external boiler and turbine, where it is transformed into electricity. Two overlapping coolant loops are often used; this counteracts the transfer of radioactivity from the reactor to the primary coolant loop. All nuclear power plants in the US use light water as a coolant. Other coolants include molten sodium, lead, a lead-bismuth mixture, or molten salts Nuclear reactors use control rods to control the fission rate of the nuclear fuel by adjusting the number of slow neutrons present to keep the rate of the chain reaction at a safe level. Control rods are made of boron, cadmium, hafnium, or other elements that are able to absorb neutrons. Boron-10, for example, absorbs neutrons by a reaction that produces lithium-7 and alpha particles. When control rod assemblies are inserted into the fuel element in the reactor core, they absorb a larger fraction of the slow neutrons, thereby slowing the rate of the fission reaction and decreasing the power produced. Conversely, if the control rods are removed, fewer neutrons are absorbed, and the fission rate and energy production increase. In an emergency, the chain reaction can be shut down by fully inserting all of the control rods into the nuclear core between the fuel rods. When control rod assemblies are inserted into the fuel element in the reactor core, they absorb a larger fraction of the slow neutrons, thereby slowing the rate of the fission reaction and decreasing the power produced. Conversely, if the control rods are removed, fewer neutrons are absorbed, and the fission rate and energy production increase. In an emergency, the chain reaction can be shut down by fully inserting all of the control rods into the nuclear core between the fuel rods. Nuclear power plants are designed in such a way that they cannot form a supercritical mass of fissionable material and therefore cannot create a nuclear explosion. But as history has shown, failures of systems and safeguards can cause catastrophic accidents, including chemical explosions and nuclear meltdowns (damage to the reactor core from overheating). The importance of cooling and containment are amply illustrated by three major accidents that occurred with the nuclear reactors at nuclear power generating stations in the United States (Three Mile Island), the former Soviet Union (Chernobyl), and Japan (Fukushima). Other nuclear incidents have occurred around the world that have involved the storage or transportation of nuclear materials. The two reactors housed at this facility are located in Middletown, Pennsylvania. This site is approximately 10 miles southeast of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. Both units are PWRs (pressurized water reactors) are were commissioned in the mid to late 1970's. Before the accident, each of the Three Mile Island (TMI) reactors generated around 800 MW of electrical power. The smaller cylindrical buildings in the photograph below are the unit 1 and 2 reactors at this facility. The four larger structures in this picture are the cooling towers that allow excess heat to be transferred to the atmosphere. Three Mile Island's Unit Two reactor lost cooling water in the secondary loop (note the arrow pointing down in the schematic below). This event occurred around 4:00 a.m. and alarms sounded in the control room immediately. Within one minute, the reactor automatically shutdown. Meanwhile, water in the primary loop (yellow tube) overheated and the pressure of the reactor increased. To relief this excess pressure inside the reactor, the pressure relief valve (top yellow/red tube) opened up. Backup pumps restarted the water in the secondary loop to assist cooling efforts. Three Mile Island's Unit Two reactor lost cooling water in the secondary loop (note the arrow pointing down in the schematic below). This event occurred around 4:00 a.m. and alarms sounded in the control room immediately. Within one minute, the reactor automatically shutdown. Meanwhile, water in the primary loop (yellow tube) overheated and the pressure of the reactor increased. To relief this excess pressure inside the reactor, the pressure relief valve (top yellow/red tube) opened up. Backup pumps restarted the water in the secondary loop to assist cooling efforts the operators closed a valve before the pressure release valve. This allowed water to remain in the primary loop. Unfortunately, most of the water in the core was in the form of steam and did not circulate efficiently throughout the core. In addition, the steam reacted with metals in the control and fuel rods. These reactions produced combustible hydrogen gas which rose to the top of the reactor core all cooling water was restored to the core successively, but a large hydrogen bubble hovered over the top of the reactor. At this time, operators were fearful the bubble might ignite and then explode the core to the outside environment. To prevent this explosion from happening, operators and engineers vented the hydrogen gas outside the nuclear reactor into the atmosphere. In the venting process, minimal number of radioisotopes were released to the areas surrounding TMI nuclear power station. Several independent research facilities have quantified the radiation that was released during the accident These studies state that residents within 10 miles of TMI were exposed to radiation within the range of 0.08. In 1984, nuclear scientists were able to survey the destruction of the reactor core. They concluded that approximately 1/3 of the fuel rods melted inside the reactor. This accident was labelled a partial meltdown (full meltdown would indicate the majority of fuel rods were melted). The contaminant structure remained intact and protected the citizens of the area. The clean-up process for TMI2 started in August of 1979. It was a twelve year project that employed over 1000 people. All radioactive fuel and water were shipped to existing nuclear waste storage facilities in the United States (Washington State and Idaho). The containment building for this reactor still remains and houses waste for the TMI 1 unit. The approximate clean-up price for this accident was 973 million dollars. The accident at Three Mile Island halted all construction of new nuclear power plants in the United States. Many citizens became fearful of nuclear power in general and became supportive of other types of energy sources. Films like the China Syndrome catalysed this feeling for decades after this catastrophe. A test was scheduled at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant to evaluate residual cooling capacity  in the event of a power grid failure. At the time of the accident the Chernobyl facility used four RBMK  reactors to produce a total of 4000 MW of energy. Two more reactors were being constructed to produce additional wattage. RBMKs not only produce large amount of energy, but also produce weapons grade Pu-239. The excessive power, design, and materials of these reactors have discouraged many countries (the United States) from building them. Schematic of a RBMK reactor. Nuclear reactors require active cooling in order to remove the heat generated by radioactive decay. Even when not generating power, reactors still generate some heat, which must be removed in order to prevent damage to the reactor core. Cooling is usually accomplished through fluid flow, water in Chernobyl's case. The problem at the Chernobyl plant was that following an emergency shutdown of all power, diesel generators were needed to run the cooling pumps. These generators took about a minute to attain full speed, which was deemed an unacceptably long time for the reactor to be without cooling. It was suggested that the rotational momentum of the winding down steam turbine be used to power the pumps in the time between shutdown and the generators being ready. A test was devised to test this method in 1982, but the turbine did not prove to be successful in providing the required voltage as it spooled down. Two more tests would be conducted in the following years, but would also be unsuccessful. The fourth test was scheduled to be run .The experiment was devised in such a way that if it had gone as planned, the disruption and danger to the plant would be very minimal. First, the reactors would be brought down to low power, between 700 and 800 megawatts. Then the steam turbine would be run up to full speed and then turned off. The power generated by the winding down generators would then be measured to determine if it was sufficient to power the cooling pumps in the time before the diesel generators got up to full speed. By 1986, the plant had been running for two years without the implementation of a method to keep the cooling pumps running continuously following an emergency shutdown. This was an important safety measure that the plant was lacking, which presumably gave the plant managers a considerable amount of urgency in completing another test. The steam to the turbines was shut off, causing the turbines to start spooling down. Four of the eight cooling pumps were also shut down. The diesel generator was started and began powering the cooling pumps Between this time, the four pumps were powered by the slowing steam turbines. As the turbines slowed down, their power output decreased, slowing the cooling pumps. This lead to increased formation of steam voids in the core, reducing the ability of the cooling water to absorb neutrons. This increased the power output of the reactor, which caused more water to boil into steam, further increasing the reactor's power. However, during this time the automatic control system was successful in limiting power increase through the insertion of control rods The process of inserting the control rods was initiated, but it took about 20 seconds for the rods to be completely inserted. A flawed design in the graphite-tip control rod meant that coolant was displaced before the neutron absorbing material could be fully inserted and slow down the reaction. This meant that the process of inserting the control rods actually increased the reaction rate in the lower half of the core. The process of inserting the control rods was initiated, but it took about 20 seconds for the rods to be completely inserted. A flawed design in the graphite-tip control rod meant that coolant was displaced before the neutron absorbing material could be fully inserted and slow down the reaction. This meant that the process of inserting the control rods actually increased the reaction rate in the lower half of the core The test continued, extra water pumps were activated in order to increase the water flow. The increased coolant flow rate led to an increase of the coolant temperature in the core, reducing the safety margin. The extra water flow also led to a decrease in the core's temperature and increased the neutron absorption rate, decreasing the reactor's power output. Operators removed the manual control rods in order to maintain power. All these actions led to the reactor being in an unstable state that was clearly outside safe operation protocol. Almost all the control rods had been removed, which reduced the effectiveness of inserting safety rods in an emergency shutdown. The water was very close to boiling, which meant that any power increase would cause it to boil. If it started boiling, it would be less effective at absorbing neutrons, further increasing the reactor's power output the steam to the turbines was shut off, causing the turbines to start spooling down. Four of the eight cooling pumps were also shut down. The diesel generator was started and began powering the cooling pumps Between this time, the four pumps were powered by the slowing steam turbines. As the turbines slowed down, their power output decreased, slowing the cooling pumps. This lead to increased formation of steam voids in the core, reducing the ability of the cooling water to absorb neutrons. This increased the power output of the reactor, which caused more water to boil into steam, further increasing the reactor's power. However, during this time the automatic control system was successful in limiting power increase through the insertion of control rods. a button was pressed that initiated the emergency shutdown of the reactor and the insertion of all control rods. It is believed that this was done as a routine method to shut down the reactor to conclude the experiment and not as an emergency measure. The process of inserting the control rods was initiated, but it took about 20 seconds for the rods to be completely inserted. A flawed design in the graphite-tip control rod meant that coolant was displaced before the neutron absorbing material could be fully inserted and slow down the reaction. This meant that the process of inserting the control rods actually increased the reaction rate in the lower half of the core. A massive power spike occurred, causing the core to overheat. Some of the fuel rods fractured, causing the control rods to become stuck before they were fully inserted. Within three seconds the core's power output rose to above 500 MW. According to simulation, it is estimated that power output then rose to 30 GW, ten times the normal power output. This was caused by the rising power output causing massive steam build-up, which destroyed fuel elements and ruptured their channels It is not possible to know precisely what sequence of events led to the destruction of the reactor. It is believed that the steam build-up entered the reactor's inner structure and lifted the 2000 ton upper plate. This steam explosion further ruptured fuel channels, resulting in more coolant turning into steam and leaving the reactor core. This loss of coolant further increased the reactor's power. A nuclear excursion (an increasing nuclear chain reaction) caused a second, even more powerful explosion. The explosion destroyed the core and scattered its contents in the surrounding area, igniting the red-hot graphite blocks. Against safety regulations, a flammable material, bitumen, had been used in roof of the reactor. When this was ignited and scattered into the surrounding area, it started several fires on reactor 3. Those working there were not aware of the damage that had been done and continued running the reactor until it was shut down. In the worst-hit parts of the reactor building, radiation levels were high enough to cause fatal doses in a matter of minutes. However, all dosimeters available to the workers did not have the ability to read radiation levels so high and thus read "off scale." Thus, the crew did not know exactly how much radiation they were being exposed to. It was assumed that radiation levels were much lower than they actually were, leading to the reactor crew chief to believe that the reactor was still intact. He and his crew would try to pump water into the reactor for several hours, causing most of them to receive fatal doses of radiation Fire crew were called in to protect the remaining buildings from catching fire and to extinguish the still burning reactor 4. While some firefighters were not aware of the harmful doses of radiation they were receiving and had assumed it to be a simple electrical fire, others knew that they would probably receive fatal doses of radiation. However, their heroic efforts were necessary in order to try to contain the large amounts of radiation being released into the atmosphere. The fires in the surrounding buildings were extinguished by 5:00 AM, but it would take firefighters until May 10 before they could fully extinguish reactor 4. In order to prevent a steam explosion from occurring, volunteers were needed to swim through radioactive water and drain a pool of water under the reactor core. While they were successful, they would later succumb to the high doses of radiation that they had received. The worst of the radioactive debris was shovelled back into the reactor by crew wearing heavy protective gear. In total, 600,000 people worked in the cleanup, about 250,000 of which received their lifetimes' limit of radiation. It is estimated that over 10,000 eventually died from the radiation. By December, a concrete sarcophagus had been completed that sealed off the reactor. This was never meant to be a completely permanent solution, however, and is now in danger of collapsing. A collapse could cause a large amount of radioactive material to once again be released and spread around the world. This is why it is necessary that a new structure be constructed to contain reactor Pripyat, a city nearby the power plant, was not immediately evacuated. At first, the government denied that the reactor had exploded and insisted that it was only a small accident. By April 27, though, investigators were forced to acknowledge that the reactor had exploded and ordered Pripyat to be immediately evacuated. 400 times more radiation was released by the disaster than had been by the atomic bombing of Hiroshima. The radiation would later be detected in almost all parts of Europe. Over one million people could have been adversely affected by the radiation. The radiation would cause numerous problems, including Down's Syndrome, chromosomal aberrations, mutations, leukaemia, thyroid cancer, and birth defects. The radiation would affect all parts of the environment surrounding the plant, killing plants and animals and infecting the soil and groundwater. Life has returned to the area and seems to be flourishing, possibly due to the lack of human intrusion. Remarkably, numerous species have been reported to have adapted to their environment and have developed increased tolerance of radiation, making it possible for them to live with the radiation that is still prevalent in the soil and plants around the plant. It has even been reported that radiotrophic fungi have been growing on the walls of reactor 4. Today, radiation levels are still higher than normal in the areas surrounding the plant, but have dropped considerably from the levels that they were at twenty years ago. It is now considered safe to visit the areas immediately surrounding the plant for short periods of time. However, it is estimated that it will take 20,000 years for reactor 4's core to be completely safe. Another major nuclear accident involving a reactor occurred in April 1986, at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant in Ukraine, which was still a part of the former Soviet Union. While operating at low power during an unauthorized experiment with some of its safety devices shut off, one of the reactors at the plant became unstable. Its chain reaction became uncontrollable and increased to a level far beyond what the reactor was designed for. The steam pressure in the reactor rose to between 100 and 500 times the full power pressure and ruptured the reactor. Because the reactor was not enclosed in a containment building, a large amount of radioactive material spewed out, and additional fission products were released, as the graphite (carbon) moderator of the core ignited and burned. The fire was controlled, but over 200 plant workers and firefighters developed acute radiation sickness and at least 32 soon died from the effects of the radiation. It is predicted that about 4000 more deaths will occur among emergency workers and former Chernobyl residents from radiation-induced cancer and leukaemia. The reactor has since been encapsulated in steel and concrete, a now-decaying structure known as the sarcophagus. Almost 30 years later, significant radiation problems still persist in the area, and Chernobyl largely remains a wasteland. the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant in Japan was badly damaged by a 9.0-magnitude earthquake and resulting tsunami. Three reactors up and running at the time were shut down automatically, and emergency generators came online to power electronics and coolant systems. However, the tsunami quickly flooded the emergency generators and cut power to the pumps that circulated coolant water through the reactors. High-temperature steam in the reactors reacted with zirconium alloy to produce hydrogen gas. The gas escaped into the containment building, and the mixture of hydrogen and air exploded. Radioactive material was released from the containment vessels as the result of deliberate venting to reduce the hydrogen pressure, deliberate discharge of coolant water into the sea, and accidental or uncontrolled events. An evacuation zone around the damaged plant extended over 12.4 miles away, and an estimated 200,000 people were evacuated from the area. All 48 of Japan’s nuclear power plants were subsequently shut down, remaining shuttered as of December 2014. Since the disaster, public opinion has shifted from largely favouring to largely opposing increasing the use of nuclear power plants, and a restart of Japan’s atomic energy program is still stalled the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant in Japan was badly damaged by a 9.0-magnitude earthquake and resulting tsunami. Three reactors up and running at the time were shut down automatically, and emergency generators came online to power electronics and coolant systems. However, the tsunami quickly flooded the emergency generators and cut power to the pumps that circulated coolant water through the reactors. High-temperature steam in the reactors reacted with zirconium alloy to produce hydrogen gas. The gas escaped into the containment building, and the mixture of hydrogen and air exploded. Radioactive material was released from the containment vessels as the result of deliberate venting to reduce the hydrogen pressure, deliberate discharge of coolant water into the sea, and accidental or uncontrolled events. An evacuation zone around the damaged plant extended over 12.4 miles away, and an estimated 200,000 people were evacuated from the area. All 48 of Japan’s nuclear power plants were subsequently shut down, remaining shuttered as of December 2014. Since the disaster, public opinion has shifted from largely favouring to largely opposing increasing the use of nuclear power plants, and a restart of Japan’s atomic energy program is still stalled. The tailings or waste produced by the extraction or concentration of uranium from its ore contain radioactive isotopes of uranium, thorium, and radium as well as significant concentrations of heavy metal including chromium, lead, molybdenum, and vanadium. More than 200 pounds of tailings are produced for each pound of uranium. This sandy waste material must be contained in carefully monitored sites known as tailings piles In the open fuel cycle, the spent fuel rods remain in the pools under at least 20 feet of water. This aqueous layer protects the surroundings from radiation. Currently, most reactor sites in the United States utilize this type of storage. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) requires all facilities to store spend fuel rods at least three years under water. Most nuclear plants will keep rods in water up to around ten years and then transfer waste to a dry system (cask) Once fuel rods are removed from the pool, they are placed in a cylinder in a chemically inert atmosphere of helium gas .The cylinder is then sealed and encased in steel and concrete to contain the radiation and enhance security for storage or transportation to a permanent repository. All nuclear power plants are allowed to use dry cask storage on site. If a facility is full, then dry fuel rods can be transferred to a decommissioned nuclear power plant. Rods stored on or off site can be transported to a temporary consolidated storage site. Nuclear waste is radioactive waste, meaning that it spontaneously emits radiation. It usually originates from the by-products of nuclear reactions in applications such as medicine and research. Radioactive waste degrades with time, releasing alpha, beta, and gamma radiation that pose many health risks to the environment and most organisms, including humans. Due to the harmful nature of nuclear waste, there is strict government regulation on the safe disposal of it. There are several types of waste, and as such, many different ways of discarding it. Fukushima Dai-ichi Nuclear Power Plant has been occurred. Huge amounts of radionuclides were released in atmosphere and ocean. Japanese prefectural governments have carried out environmental radioactivity monitoring; external dose rate, radioactivity measurements in environmental samples and others. Since March 18, 2011, daily and monthly deposition samples were collected in 45 stations covering Japanese Islands and radionuclides in the deposition samples were determined. We summarize radioactive deposition data reported by Japanese Government and study the depositional behaviours of the Fukushima-derived radionuclides. The results revealed that Fukushima-derived radioactive cloud dominantly affected in the central and eastern part of Honshu-Island, although it affected all of Japanese land area and also western North Pacific. The temporal change of the Fukushima-derived 137Cs revealed that the apparent atmospheric residence time of the Fukushima-derived. Media discourse and public opinion are treated as two parallel systems of constructing meaning. This paper explores their relation- ship by analyzing the discourse on nuclear power in four general audience media: television news coverage, newsmagazine accounts, editorial cartoons, and syndicated opinion columns. The analysis traces the careers of different interpretive packages on nuclear power from 1945 to the present. This media discourse, it is argued, is an essential context for understanding the formation of public opinion on nuclear power. More specifically, it helps to account for such survey results as the decline in support for nuclear power before Three Mile Island, a rebound after a burst of media publicity has died out, the gap between general support for nuclear power and support for a plant in one's own community, and the changed relationship of age to support for nuclear power from 1950 to the present. predations and meanings for relevant events. An archivist might catalogue the metaphors, catchphrases, visual images, moral appeals, and other symbolic devices that characterize this discourse. The catalogue would be organized, of course, since the elements are clustered; we encounter them not as individual items but as interpretive packages. On most policy issues, there are competing packages available in this culture. Indeed, one can view policy issues as, in part, a symbolic contest over which interpretation will prevail. This cultural system has a logic and dynamic of its own. Packages ebb and flow in prominence and are constantly revised and updated to accommodate new events. The process by which this issue culture is produced and changed needs to be ac- counted for in its own right, regardless of any claims that one might make about its causal effect on public opinion. Parallel to this cultural level is a cognitive one of individuals making sense of the same issue. Individuals bring their own life histories, social interactions, and psychological predispositions to the process of con- structing meaning; they approach an issue with some anticipatory schema, albeit sometimes with a very tentative one. Most public opinion studies focus on the aggregate outcomes of this process-that is, attitudes for and against particular policies-and on how such attitudes change over time. The findings suggest which schemata are shared and the relative popularity of different competitors. Both levels of analysis involve the social construction of meaning. By examining discourse and public opinion as parallel systems, we deliberately avoid making certain causal assumptions. We do not, in this paper, argue that changes in media discourse cause changes in public opinion. Each system interacts with the other: media discourse is part of the process by which individuals construct meaning, and public opinion is part of the process by which journalists and other cultural entrepreneurs develop and crystallize meaning in public discourse. A full exploration of this interaction between media discourse and opinion formation requires an analysis of both systems over several is- sues. In this paper, our attempt is more modest: to show how changing media discourse on nuclear power provides an essential context for interpreting a variety of survey results on nuclear power. But our argument on how media discourse and public opinion interact will not be clear without a fuller explication of our underlying model. General audience media, then, are only some of the forums for public discourse on an issue. If one is interested in predicting policy outcomes, they are not necessarily the most important forums. But if one is interested in public opinion, then media discourse dominates the larger issue culture, both reflecting it and contributing to its creation. Journalists may draw their ideas and language from any or all of the other forums, frequently paraphrasing or quoting their source. Energy is one of the main requirements of sustaining human civilization. Conventional sources of energy, which account for over 85% of the total energy consumed by the mankind, are fossil fuels. Fossil fuels were formed over millions of years from remains of plants and animals by action of pressure and heat and are now found beneath the earth's surface. When such fuels are burnt, they release chemical energy trapped in them. Fossil fuels consist of coal, petroleum and natural gases. Coal is a solid hydrocarbon with nearly 75% of the world's deposit being found in China, USA and the Russian Federation. Though most abundant and the least expensive of the three, burning coal causes a lot of environmental problems as it releases harmful chemical there are several issues connected with disposal of radioactive nuclear waste and decommissioning of old nuclear power plants, which makes the production of nuclear energy a contentious subject. In addition, the technology that produces nuclear power can also be used to produce nuclear bombs, which makes transfer of nuclear technology a delicate issue. Nuclear energy is made available by fission and by fusion . In the following, we will discuss the principle behind production of nuclear energy. Inside a nucleus there is a competition between the repulsive Coulomb force and the attractive strong force. In  most nuclei the strong force dominates. However, for heavier nuclei, there is a delicate balance between the two which can be easily disturbed leading to a fission of such nuclei. Spontaneous fission is of rare occurrence as the half life for fission is very high. The way to effect fission in a nucleus is to excite the nucleus – the energy required to initiate fission being between 5 to 6 MeV Nuclear energy has been harnessed for power production, primarily through fission of Uranium, Thorium and Plutonium, with Uranium being the most common fissile material today. Looking at the binding energy curve, one can see that lighter nuclei have less binding energy than the heavier ones. Thus, if a heavy nucleus breaks up into fragments, the sum of energies of the fragments would be less than the energy of the initial nucleus. This is the principle behind release of energy through fission. As the released energy is in MeV, fission released a million times more energy than chemical processes like burning of coal or oil which release energy of the order of electron fission is initiated by capture of a slow neutron, called thermal neutron as the kinetic energy of such a neutron is of the order of thermal energy of air molecules, by uranium nucleus. Upon capturing a neutron, the uranium nucleus gets into an excited state and the delicate force balance inside the nucleus gets disturbed. The excited nucleus breaks up into two fragments of nearly comparable size Notice that in each of the reactions neutrons are produced. The average number of neutrons produced in fission reactions is 2.5. These neutrons can then be used to produce Chain Reaction. Consider reactions where 2 neutrons are produced. The first neutron causes one uranium nucleus to split into two fragments producing 2 neutrons, which in turn can cause two more uranium to fission, producing four fragments and four new neutrons. The chain reaction will continue till all the U fuel is spent. This is roughly what happens in an atom bomb. The runaway chain reaction needs to be controlled, if one is to use it for power generation. This is done by removing excess neutrons so that the chain reaction can proceed at a slow pace till all the fuel is burnt. Removing excess neutrons is achieved by inserting control rods which contain neutron absorbing material. Cadmium and boron rods are usually used for such purpose When fission reaction occurs tremendous amount of energy is liberated. While some energy appears as radiation, most of the energy is in the form of kinetic energy of the fragments. The fragments dissipates most of their kinetic energy as heat, which can be used to boil water and the resulting steam can be used to turn turbines to generate electricity. The following are the stages in the working of a power reactor. Enrichment The core is the centre of the reactor which contains the fuel which is used in running the reactor. Control rods to absorb excess neutrons are introduced into the core. Usually a heavy steel vessel surrounds the core. A reactor which produces enough neutrons to sustain controlled chain reaction is called critical . Criticality not only depends on the nuclear reaction producing neutrons but also depends on availability of enough uranium which must absorb a released neutron. Enrichment of the fuel ensures this for a reactor. The mass of the fissile material required to sustain chain reaction is said to be critical mass . If a reactor cannot sustain chain reaction, it is called sub-critical. On the other hand, if the chain reaction proceeds uncontrolled, as in an atom bomb, the reactor is called supercritical We have seen that control rods of neutron absorbing materials like Cd are inserted to make sure that the reactor does not become supercritical. It is not possible to mechanically control the rate of insertion or withdrawal of control rods which are emitted the instant the nuclear reaction takes place. However, the radioactive decay of the fission fragments produces additional neutrons which are called delayed neutrons. For instance, in the first mentioned fission reaction above, U-236 fragments into Cs and Rb, in addition to releasing two prompt neutrons. These fission fragments themselves are unstable and undergo different types of radioactive decays. Delayed neutrons are associated with fragments which undergo beta decay. In case of , about 0.03% of the decay is through beta emission, half life against beta decay being 25 seconds The heat generated in the core is to be removed for being used to heat water to generate steam and eventual generation of electricity. The thermal energy is removed by a liquid coolant that flows through pipes in the reactor core. Based on the method used for extracting fission energy from the core of the reactor, there are two primary types of reactor. They are Boiling - Water Reactor (BWR) In a boiling water reactor, water in pipes circulates inside the core. The water gets heated, generates steam which is then used to drive turbines. As the water enters the core, there is a possibility of it becoming radioactive. Further, in case of a rapture of the pipe due to extreme heat, it could lead to accidents. Pressurized - Water Reactor (PWR) In these reactors water is extracted in two steps. The primary coolant, as in the case of BWR circulates inside the core. However, the water circulates under great pressure so that it does not become steam. The heat is transferred through a heat exchanger to a secondary coolant, which may be used to drive a turbine. As the secondary coolant does not enter the core, it does not become radioactive Fast Breeder Reactor While fission of U-235 can yield substantial energy, the world's supply of U-235 is limited. However, it is possible to use the neutrons given out by fission reaction to breed fuel from non-fissionable isotopes like U238. As U-238 is more plentiful than U-235, it is an attractive option. U-238 can absorb a fast neutron given out by a fission reaction to yield fissionable plutonium. A typical breeding reaction is as follows The fast neutrons that are produced during fission of the inner part is captured by the outer layer to breed fissionable plutonium and U-233. Thus, the reactor breeds more fuel than it consumes, which accounts for the name. No moderators are used in the reactor as the neutrons should not be slowed down. This is also the reason why the primary coolant used is not water which could slow down neutrons. The usual coolant used in the primary loop is liquid sodium Nuclear waste (which consists of fission products) contains highly radioactive material. Though the level of radioactivity for most components goes down fast, the nuclear waste have to be kept away from human contact as they could cause serious illnesses like cancer. Safe disposal of nuclear waste is a cause of major concern. Like any major power station, nuclear reactors are also likely to have accidents due to faulty design or things out of control. The worst recorded accident which led to several deaths and other fallouts from the released radioactivity occurred in Chernobyl, near Kiev (Ukraine). A faulty design led to a fire and explosion of the graphite core. The radioactivity spread over erstwhile USSR and also to parts of Europe, including Scandinavia. In 1979 one of the plants in Three Mile Island, near Harrisburg in USA, lost coolant leading to overheating and partial meltdown of the core which caused radioactive leak. Because of their high cost, nuclear power plants are designed to produce very high power. This leads to thermal emissions which can lead to local warming at a level much higher than that for conventional power stations. Though the nuclear power stations do not give out more heat to the surroundings than thermal power stations per kilowatt of power produced for electricity, the effect of local heating is more for large power stations. All the forecasts of world energy demand for the next 50 years point towards very significant increases in consumption. A big share of this new demand will come from areas of the world where existing energy consumption is now relatively low in comparison with the OECD countries, and which are becoming increasingly integrated in the global economy. As energy demand grows, all societies worldwide will face a real challenge in providing the energy needed to feed economic growth and improve social development, while enhancing protection of the environment. In this context, it is not difficult to conclude that it is the responsibility of policy makers to establish energy policies that meet that challenge while being robust enough to cope with the risks associated with the globalisation of the world economy. Diversification, security of supply, protection of the environment and technology development are key elements of any energy policy that tries to put into the markets enough energy at a reasonable price in a sustainable way. Among the different energy sources that are contributing significantly to world supply none appears to policy makers as more complex than nuclear energy. The economic, technological and social implications of nuclear power makes any decision something that goes far beyond the normal actors of the market place The serious questions our societies are asking about nuclear energy include the safety of nuclear installations, the ultimate disposal of long-lived radioactive waste, nuclear energy’s potential to help reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the economy of the whole fuel cycle, especially in liberalised electricity markets, and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The OECD Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) has worked in many of these areas for more than 40 years. The NEA methodology calls for having most of the main world specialists in every field work together to provide a collective analysis in an objective way as a fundamental input for governments. The work of the NEA is based on the scientific and technical analysis of the various components of the entire nuclear fuel cycle. This base of science and technology is the solid ground on which policy makers can establish nuclear and energy policies, once the social factors have been incorporated. It is very difficult to describe in a short publication all the aspects that need to be considered to establish a robust nuclear policy. Yet, I think that this NEA publication can help policy makers in fulfilling their responsibilities, and other readers in better understanding what are the realities surrounding one of the most impressive technologies of the past 60 years; a technology that is based on something we cannot see, the internal forces that link together the basic physical entities, which form that smallest component of matter, the atom. To the extent to which the atom can be mastered without unacceptable risk, the contribution of nuclear energy to the sustainable development of our societies is on the table stimulated by the urgency of the Second World War, nuclear science progressed rapidly from the discovery of the neutron by Sir James Chadwick in 1932. Out of this basic knowledge came the discovery in 1939 that when atoms fission (i.e. are split), energy is released. This led in turn to the first controlled chain reaction (1943), the first atomic weapon (1945), and the first production of electricity using nuclear energy (1951). Thus, within a span of twenty years, nuclear energy developed from first principles to practical demonstration. Following its first application for generating electricity in the United States, nuclear energy began to be applied to the production of electricity in the United Kingdom (1953), Russia (1954), France (1956), and Germany (1961) five countries within the first decade. Ten more countries began nuclear-based generation in the 1960s followed by another ten in the 1970s. The oil crisis of the early seventies provoked a surge in nuclear power plant orders and construction. Later that decade, the world economic slowdown combined with the declining price of fossil fuels curtailed the growth of nuclear energy demand.  As this took effect, two accidents, at Three Mile Island in the United States (1979) and at Chernobyl in the former Soviet Union (1986), raised serious questions in the public mind about nuclear safety. The overall effect was a significant slowing of nuclear energy’s growth in the nineties.  nevertheless, some countries continued to push ahead strongly with reactor construction, thus contributing to small increases in nuclear electricity production. e high worldwide reliance on fossil fuels in supplying primary energy and producing electricity. The consequent production of greenhouse gases, which cause changes in the world’s climate, is a main cause of the growing emphasis on “decarbonising” the world’s economies. Concern for the security of energy supply arising from the concentration of oil and natural gas resources among relatively few suppliers is also an element of reflection in national energy policies. Nuclear energy’s lack of carbon emissions and the relatively uniform availability of fuel resources worldwide are focusing attention on its ability to meet these energy policy objectives. governmental involvement and public concern that makes it unique among energy sources. Many factors contribute to this, including its military origins and potential to be applied to weapons purposes, technical complexity, the long-term implications of nuclear waste, its complicated safety, legal and insurance requirements, the consequences associated with potential accidents, the health effects of exposure to ionising radiation and the large-scale investments required for its exploitation. Understanding these issues is important, then, to understanding nuclear energy today. A nuclear reactor is, in essence, simply a way of producing heat to boil water, thereby creating steam to drive turbine generators for electricity production. This chapter explains the processes involved and introduces the basic technologies applied to harnessing the energy. A nuclear reaction is one that occurs when the nucleus of any atom is changed as a result of collision with some other physical entity, which may be alpha particles, gamma rays, neutrons, protons or even other atoms. Of the many possible nuclear reactions, two – fission and fusion – are of particular interest because they can produce a great deal of energy. Of these two, only fission has so far been harnessed for electricity production. Certain naturally occurring and man-made heavy elements, for example uranium and plutonium, are relatively unstable. When the nucleus of any such element is impacted by a neutron which it absorbs, it can fission, or split into two fragments, releasing at the same time two or three neutrons and energy The fragments, of which many different combinations are possible, are called fission products. The total mass of the products of the reaction (fission products and neutrons) is minutely less than the original mass of the atom and impacting neutron, the difference having been converted into energy according to Einstein’s famous formula gives the probabilities of isotopes of a given mass being formed by a fission reaction, in this case that of uranium-235 (235U). In terms of abundance and radioactivity, the most important fission product isotopes resulting from the fission of 235U are radioactive forms of bromine (Br), caesium (Cs), iodine (I), krypton (Kr), strontium (Sr) and xenon (Xe). Like any radioactive element, these daughter isotopes decay, each over a different period measured by and referred to as its half-life. Because of their abundance and radioactivity these daughter isotopes and their decay products form a significant part of nuclear waste (see Chapter 4). As the fission fragments are ejected after the original impact, they begin to collide with nearby atoms and within a millimetre lose most of their motion energy, which is converted into heat energy. This heat is then used to generate electricity. Lise Meitner (1878-1968) was one of the central persons in the discovery of nuclear fission. Born in Austria, she did her experimental work on transuranic elements in Germany. Forced to flee the Nazis, Meitner, a Jew, went to Sweden in 1938. While visiting her nephew Otto Frisch in Denmark, she and Frisch proved that a splitting of the uranium atom was feasible. In 1939, they described their discovery in a landmark paper, Disintegration of Uranium by Neutrons: A New Type of Nuclear Reaction, and in it coined the term fission. Neutrons with a relatively low kinetic energy [less than 0.1 electron volt (eV)] are known as thermal neutrons; these are the most efficient in causing fission in uranium or plutonium. Those with higher kinetic energy, typically in a range up to 10 million eV (MeV), are referred to as fast neutrons. All neutrons produced by a fission reaction are fast neutrons. Though fast neutrons are less efficient in producing fission in uranium, they can be effective for a wider range of isotopes. A moderator is used to slow the fast neutrons released during fission to the more efficient thermal energies needed in commercial nuclear power plants. When the nucleus of an atom captures a neutron and does not fission, it may change into another element. In a nuclear reactor, this results in the creation of an important set of long-lived 	Neutrons with a relatively low kinetic energy [less than 0.1 electron volt (eV)] are known as thermal neutrons; these are the most efficient in causing fission in uranium or plutonium. Those with higher kinetic energy, typically in a range up to 10 million eV (MeV), are referred to as fast neutrons. All neutrons produced by a fission reaction are fast neutrons. Though fast neutrons are less efficient in producing fission in uranium, they can be effective for a wider range of isotopes. A moderator is used to slow the fast neutrons released during fission to the more efficient thermal energies needed in commercial nuclear power plants. When the nucleus of an atom captures a neutron and does not fission, it may change into another element. In a nuclear reactor, this results in the creation of an important set of long-lived The basic technology used to harness the energy of nuclear fission is the nuclear reactor. Though there are many types of nuclear reactors, all have several components in common, viz fuel, moderator, coolant and control rods Uranium has two main isotopes: 235U and 238U. The former, 235U, is the only fissile material found in nature, i.e. it can easily fission when hit either by thermal or fast neutrons. Thus, almost all reactors use uranium as fuel. Most fuels for commercial reactors are processed so as to contain a higher concentration of 235U than occurs in nature, typically 2-5% compared with the 0.711% found in nature; the fuel is said to be enriched in 235U. The remainder of the fuel, typically 238U, can fission only when hit by fast neutrons of certain energies; but when neutron capture occurs, it eventually transforms into plutonium-239 (239Pu). This isotope of plutonium (one of many) is also able to fission under the impact of thermal or fast neutrons, and its contribution to the energy output of a light water reactor gradually grows until it represents almost 30% of the power that is generated. Some reactors use fuel in which plutonium is incorporated at the outset, called mixed-oxide fuel (or MOX). This is one way of using up stocks of plutonium extracted from spent fuels, and which could otherwise represent waste A moderator is necessary to slow the fast neutrons created during fission down to the thermal energy range so as to increase their efficiency in causing further fission. The moderator must be a light material that will allow the neutrons to slow down without being captured. Usually, ordinary water is used; alternatives in use are graphite, a form of carbon, and heavy water, water formed with the heavier deuterium isotope of hydrogen A coolant is necessary to absorb and remove the heat produced by nuclear fission and maintain the temperature of the fuel within acceptable limits. It can then transfer the heat to drive electricity-generating turbines. If water is used as the coolant, the steam produced can be fed directly to the turbines. Alternatively, it can be passed through a heat-exchanger which will remove the heat and produce the necessary steam. Other possible coolants are heavy water, gases like carbon dioxide or helium, or molten metals such as sodium or lead and bismuth. A coolant can also be a moderator; water is used in this dual way in most modern reactors into the core and support systems to permit the monitoring and control of the reactor, for example temperature, pressure, radiation and power level. A popular and useful method of categorising reactors is according to the type of coolant used. About 80% of commercial reactors in use at the beginning of 2003 were cooled and moderated with ordinary water and are known as light water reactors (LWRs). Of these, two major types exist – pressurised water reactors (PWRs), which includes a Russian variant (VVER), and boiling water reactors (BWRs). The majority of the remaining 20% of reactors are cooled either by heavy water or gas. Figure 2.4 shows how the main types of commercial reactor are distributed worldwide. Each of the main types of commercial reactor is briefly described below with data on the number of reactors current as of 1 January 2003. Within each basic type there are different designs resulting from different national, manufacturer and customer requirements Control rods are made of materials that absorb neutrons, for example, boron, silver, indium, cadmium and hafnium. They are introduced into the reactor to reduce the number of neutrons and thus stop the fission process when required, or, during operation, to control and regulate the level and spatial distribution of power in the reactor. Control rods are made of materials that absorb neutrons, for example, boron, silver, indium, cadmium and hafnium. They are introduced into the reactor to reduce the number of neutrons and thus stop the fission process when required, or, during operation, to control and regulate the level and spatial distribution of power in the reactor. At the beginning of 2003, there were 212 PWRs worldwide, of which 150 were in France, Japan and the United States. Ordinary water is used as both coolant and moderator. The coolant is kept at high pressure (about 15.5 MPa or 2 250 psi) to keep it liquid during operation, retained within a pressure boundary comprised mainly of the reactor pressure vessel and piping in the primary system. The coolant is circulated using powerful pumps so that the heat is transferred to boil water in a separate, secondary loop in a steam generator. The steam thus produced drives the electricity-producing turbine generators A total of 51 VVERs were in operation, of which 26 were in the Russian Federation and Ukraine. They are also operating in Armenia, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Finland, Hungary and the Slovak Republic. The name is a Russian acronym connoting a water-cooled, water-moderated energy reactor. VVERs are, in essence, Russian designed PWRs. First-generation VVER (type 440/230) reactors need expensive modifications because their original designs do not correspond to contemporary practices in nuclear safety. As a result, decisions have been taken to shut down some of these units, such as in Bulgaria and the Slovak Republic A total of 51 VVERs were in operation, of which 26 were in the Russian Federation and Ukraine. They are also operating in Armenia, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Finland, Hungary and the Slovak Republic. The name is a Russian acronym connoting a water-cooled, water-moderated energy reactor. VVERs are, in essence, Russian designed PWRs. First-generation VVER (type 440/230) reactors need expensive modifications because their original designs do not correspond to contemporary practices in nuclear safety. As a result, decisions have been taken to shut down some of these units, such as in Bulgaria and the Slovak Republic Thirty-four PHWRs were operating worldwide in six countries, of which 14 were in their country of origin, Canada, and the remainder in Argentina, India, Pakistan, the Republic of Korea and Romania. Known as CANDU reactors (short for Canadian deuterium uranium), they use heavy water (D2O, water formed with the heavier deuterium isotope of hydrogen), as both coolant and moderator. Heavy water allows natural uranium to be used as the fuel, thereby eliminating the need, and cost, to enrich the uranium. On the other hand, the production of heavy water requires a dedicated plant to separate the D2O from ordinary water, raising the concentration of D2O from its natural concentration of much less than 1% to the 99% used in a CANDU reactor. As in a PWR, the coolant is passed through a steam generator so as to boil ordinary water in a separate loop. An advantage of the CANDU design is that refuelling can take place during operation, whereas PWRs and BWRs must shut down in order to refuel. This feature allows high availability but also increases the complexity of operation As regards gas-cooled reactors, 33 were in commercial use only in the United Kingdom. There are two types, the Magnox (named from the magnesium alloy used to clad the fuel elements) and the advanced gas-cooled reactor (AGR). Both use carbon dioxide as the coolant and graphite as the moderator. The Magnox uses natural uranium as fuel and the AGR, enriched uranium. Like CANDU reactors, these designs can be refuelled on-line, with the same characteristics as stated above Seventeen RBMK remain in operation of which 15 were in the Russian Federation and two in Lithuania. The name is a Russian acronym meaning large power boiling reactor. Ordinary water is used as the coolant and graphite as the moderator. As with a BWR, the coolant boils as it passes through the reactor and the resultant steam is passed directly to turbine generators. The RBMK, as an early design, was often built, and some are being operated, without safety characteristics and features required elsewhere. The well-known accident at Chernobyl (Ukraine) in 1986 happened to a reactor of this type. Reactors of this type are the object of special safety concerns because they cannot be upgraded to correspond to contemporary safety practices at reasonable cost. The reactor types described above are thermal reactors, most of the fission being caused by thermal neutrons. Fast reactors are designed so as to make use of fast neutrons with much higher kinetic energies. Fast reactors essentially create more neutrons per fission than thermal reactors and make better use of them because the probability of neutron capture decreases at higher neutron energies. These excess neutrons can be used to convert fertile materials, e.g. 238U and 232Th, into fissile materials through neutron capture. This newly created fissile material can in turn fuel the reactor. It is possible to design reactors to produce more fuel than they consume in breeder reactors. Typically, breeder reactors are fast reactors, though designs exist that could use thermal neutrons. Fast breeder reactors, by creating fuel from non-fissile isotopes and improving the efficiency of utilisation through recycling, can potentially increase available world nuclear fuel resources up to 50-fold and are thus a key element in the sustainability of nuclear energy in the very long term. Breeder reactors have been built and operated in a number of countries, though in 2002 they were operated only in France, India, Japan and the Russian Federation. Reactor lifetimes Some first-generation reactors, such as the Magnox reactors in the United Kingdom, are still in service, though after 35 years or more they are approaching the end of their operational lives. Many of today’s reactors were built in the 1970s and 1980s and will approach lifetimes of 40 years beginning around 2015. However, studies based on operating and materials experience have revealed no major technological issues inhibiting longer operational lives for many reactors, particularly PWRs and BWRs. Careful monitoring of plant performance, analysis of operating experience, modernisation programs and refurbishments offer good prospects for life extensions at many plants. For example, as of January 2003, the nuclear safety authorities in the United States had granted extensions to permit ten reactors to operate for 60 years, 20 years beyond the originally licensed operational life. Other countries such as the Russian Federation are also planning to extend the lifetimes of existing reactors. In many countries decisions on plant lifetimes are made through the periodic renewal of operating licenses, which involve comprehensive safety analyses using the latest method information and safety requirements. Whereas nuclear fission involves the splitting of a heavy atomic nucleus and a consequent release of energy, nuclear fusion is a process of combining light nuclei to form more massive nuclei with the release of energy. This process takes place continuously in the universe. In the core of the sun, at temperatures of 10-15 million °C, hydrogen is converted to helium, providing the energy that sustains life on earth. The possibility of producing energy for commercial use by fusion has been researched for decades. One possible fusion reaction being investigated (the D-T fusion reaction) is illustrated in Figure 2.7. The nuclei of two isotopes of hydrogen, one (deuterium) having one neutron and one proton, and the other (tritium) having two neutrons and one proton, combine to form helium and a neutron, releasing energy in the process. At the extremely high temperatures required for fusion reactions to take place, the fuel has changed its state from gas to plasma, a state of matter where all the electrons have been stripped from atoms, leaving only the nuclei. The understanding and control of plasma has been a major challenge in the development of fusion power. The design of a fusion reactor would differ considerably from that of a fission reactor. The principal problem is containment of the plasma fuel, which needs to be kept at very high temperatures to initiate and maintain the reaction. Research has focused on two different means of containment – magnetic and inertial. In the first, the plasma is held in a “bottle” or “torus” by magnetic fields. In the second, the mass of the fuel itself, under rapid compression, prevents escape of the plasma. In either case, the plasma must be isolated from material surfaces to avoid cooling and the introduction of impurities from the surface that would contaminate the plasma. One of the most promising means for achieving this is a toroidal (ring-shaped) magnetic confinement system of which the Tokamak configuration is now the most generally favoured (see Figure 2.8). If they become practicable, fusion reactors could potentially have certain beneficial nuclear characteristics. They could for example have a more or less unlimited supply of fuel (hydrogen available from water and tritium produced from abundant lithium be inherently safe (since the exposure of the plasma would instantly stop the fusion process) produce only small amounts of long-lived highly radioactive waste (though other types of radioactive waste would be produced with tritium being the most problematic be unable to produce fissile materials that could be used for nuclear weapons. Experiments in fusion are being conducted and test facilities exist in many parts of the world. Nevertheless, although progress has been considerable, many years of further research would be needed before a viable reactor could be available. Existing major facilities include the European Union’s Joint European Torus (JET) located in the United Kingdom; the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory (United States), and the JT-60U Tokamak at the Japanese Atomic Energy Research Institute. Canada, China, the European Union, Japan, Russia and the United States are co-operating to build the next-generation fusion test reactor – the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor, or ITER. The nuclear fuel cycle is the chain of processes whereby nuclear fuel is produced and managed before and after its use in a reactor; respectively, the front end and the back end of the fuel cycle. Here, the extraction of energy from the fuel while it is in the reactor is not regarded as part of the cycle. Two major types of fuel cycle exist – once-through and closed – the difference being the way the spent nuclear fuel is managed. The major processes in the cycle are summarised in Figure 3.1. In the once-through fuel cycle, fuel removed from a reactor is set aside in storage areas pending its ultimate disposal. A closed fuel cycle, also known as a “recycling” fuel cycle, allows the unused fissile material of the spent fuel to be recovered and reused to produce energy as new fuel The extraction of uranium ore from the earth is conducted in much the same manner as the recovery of other mineral resources, such as copper. Over 70% of uranium production is achieved by the extraction of ore using conventional open pit or underground mining methods. The remainder is mainly accounted for by in situ leaching (ISL), a method whereby a solvent solution is injected underground, dissolves the uranium into the solution and is recovered from wells for the extraction of the dissolved uranium. Milling is the process through which mined uranium ore is physically reduced to a suitable size, then chemically treated to extract and purify the uranium. It also reduces the volume of material to be transported to the next stage of the fuel cycle. Reflecting its colour and consistency, the solid product of milling (U3O8) is known as “yellowcake”, though it can also be grey in colour. At the beginning of 2001, there were 21 uranium producing countries of which ten (Australia, Canada, Kazakhstan, Namibia, Niger, the Russian Federation, South Africa, Ukraine, the United States and Uzbekistan) produced 90% of the world’s output. The dominant producers are Australia and Canada, who between them accounted for over 50% of world output in 2000. Mining and milling of uranium ore produces waste of different types, all of which require appropriate management. Waste from open pit and underground mining are soils and/or waste rock. They may also include ore with sub-economic levels of uranium or excessively high levels of contaminants. Milling produces the largest volume of waste in the form of mill tailings, which are a mixture of finely ground rock and process liquid. Tailings pose particular problems because of their large volume and radiological and chemical contaminants. ISL produces no waste rock or mill tailings but it is suitable only in specific geological circumstances and it must be appropriately managed to protect groundwater The extraction of uranium ore from the earth is conducted in much the same manner as the recovery of other mineral resources, such as copper. Over 70% of uranium production is achieved by the extraction of ore using conventional open pit or underground mining methods. The remainder is mainly accounted for by in situ leaching (ISL), a method whereby a solvent solution is injected underground, dissolves the uranium into the solution and is recovered from wells for the extraction of the dissolved uranium. Milling is the process through which mined uranium ore is physically reduced to a suitable size, then chemically treated to extract and purify the uranium. It also reduces the volume of material to be transported to the next stage of the fuel cycle. Reflecting its colour and consistency, the solid product of milling (U3O8) is known as “yellowcake”, though it can also be grey in colour. At the beginning of 2001, there were 21 uranium producing countries of which ten (Australia, Canada, Kazakhstan, Namibia, Niger, the Russian Federation, South Africa, Ukraine, the United States and Uzbekistan) produced 90% of the world’s output. The dominant producers are Australia and Canada, who between them accounted for over 50% of world output in 2000. Mining and milling of uranium ore produces waste of different types, all of which require appropriate management. Waste from open pit and underground mining are soils and/or waste rock. They may also include ore with sub-economic levels of uranium or excessively high levels of contaminants. Milling produces the largest volume of waste in the form of mill tailings, which are a mixture of finely ground rock and process liquid. Tailings pose particular problems because of their large volume and radiological and chemical contaminants. ISL produces no waste rock or mill tailings but it is suitable only in specific geological circumstances and it must be appropriately managed to protect groundwater Uranium enrichment involves the partial separation of uranium into its two main isotopes (235U and 238U), yielding two streams, the first enriched so as to contain more 235U than its natural concentration (0.711%), and the second correspondingly depleted. Most commercial reactors require uranium enriched to less than 5% 235U. Some research reactors use highly enriched uranium fuels, i.e. more than 20% 235U, but there are programs in place to move to low enriched uranium. Two methods of enrichment are in commercial use, gaseous diffusion and centrifugation, both based on UF6. Early plants used gaseous diffusion technology despite its high electricity requirement and the very large size of the plants, factors which account for their small number worldwide (see Table 3.2). For example, the gaseous diffusion plant at Tricastin in France is supplied by four nuclear reactors. More recently, advances in materials technology and fabrication methods have led to an increased use of centrifugation, resulting in lower enrichment costs, due mainly to a reduction in energy consumption by a factor of 50 The enrichment process also produces depleted uranium, of which there existed, at the end of 1999, an estimated stock of over 1.2 million tons mainly produced using the gaseous diffusion process. The depleted uranium from the gaseous diffusion process often contains recoverable 235U, normally around 0.3% 235U (compared with the initial 0.711%). Different countries have adopted different strategies for managing this material. Typically, the depleted uranium is stored in UF6 form in large cylinders as in the United States and Russia. In this form, it can represent a potential chemical hazard if the cylinders leak. Other countries, France for example, are converting their stock into a stable oxide for long-term storage and possible eventual re-use as a fuel in fast breeder reactors. Depending on the economies and available centrifuge enrichment capacity, some countries, Russia for example, “re-enrich” to recover the remaining usable 235U. Enrichment is considered a mature service industry with competitive international markets. Most reactors use uranium dioxide as their fuel. Its production in fuel form involves the transformation of UF6 into uranium dioxide (UO2) powder, which is then pressed and heated at high These are loaded into hollow metal tubes (fuel rods) that are then bundled as fuel assemblies. The metal used is highly corrosion-resistant, typically stainless steel or zirconium alloy. Over 730 fuel assemblies, containing about 46 000 fuel rods would fuel a typical BWR reactor. Less than 10% of reactors worldwide have been licensed to use mixed-oxide (MOX) fuel – a mixture of uranium dioxide and plutonium dioxide. The plutonium dioxide mainly results from the commercial recycling of spent fuel, though the Russian Federation and the United States are planning to use plutonium from surplus nuclear warheads. The production process for MOX is similar to that already described for uranium dioxide fuels, with additional precautions to protect workers from the increased radiation of this irradiated material and from inhalation of plutonium. Although there are a large number of fuel fabricators worldwide, commercial competition between them is inhibited, largely due to the highly specific requirements, different national regulatory systems and variety of reactor types. Furthermore, the fuel management strategies pursued in different countries vary according to market circumstances. The back end of the fuel cycle starts when the irradiated or “spent“ fuel is unloaded from the reactor and stored at the reactor site for an initial period, typically between five and ten years. This initial storage involves placing the spent fuel in water-filled “pools”. The water both shields the high radiation of the recently discharged fuel and helps to cool it. After this initial period of cooling, during which the highest heat dissipation occurs, the fuel’s temperature is much lower, and it is then ready for longer-term storage or for reprocessing if a recycling strategy is being pursued. Long-term storage of spent fuel may be under wet or dry conditions. If wet storage is chosen, the spent fuel is transferred to another pool of water similar to that in which it has rested during the initial period of cooling. Alternatively, and nowadays increasingly, the fuel can be loaded into large, dry shielded casks in which natural air circulation maintains it at the required temperatures, in what is known as dry storage. These casks can be transported by truck or rail to other sites if necessary. Spent fuel can be maintained under either wet or dry conditions for over 30 to 50 years before packaging or repackaging becomes necessary, or before fuel disposal. The number of plutonium recycles possible with current reprocessing and reactor technologies is limited by the build-up of plutonium isotopes that are not fissionable by the thermal neutrons found in light water reactors and by the build-up of undesirable elements, especially curium. After two to three cycles the fuel would have to be managed as a waste similar to the once-through cycle. This limitation on the number of recycles, however, does not apply if the recycled material is used in fast reactors. The uranium recovered during reprocessing has been recycled into fuel in the past but currently it is not; rather it is stored for future reuse. This is because the recovered uranium is more radioactive than natural uranium due to its exposure to neutrons in a reactor and its recycle would contaminate the enrichment and fuel fabrication facilities, complicating their operation. To use it would require dedicated facilities, something not currently economical When any nuclear plant closes permanently, whether it is a reactor, a uranium mine or a fuel cycle facility, it needs to be put into a state where it can do no harm to the public, workers or the environment. This process, known as decommissioning, usually consists of several stages. As of January 2003, over 120 commercial reactors have been shut down and are in various stages of decommissioning Eventually, and unless parts of the remaining facilities are to be used for some other purpose, all the plant and materials are removed, and the site delicensed and made available for new uses. The timing of this final phase is determined in each country by economic, technical and regulatory factors; in some cases, it may not take place until a very long time, perhaps 100 years after shutdown. However, with the introduction of robotic and telemanipulation techniques, this phase of decommissioning is often being performed earlier. The relatively long delays between completion of the three phases are to allow for the radioactivity to decay so as to protect the workers involved in the decommissioning process, as well as to facilitate storage and, ultimately, disposal of the radioactive materials. Nuclear power plants have now reached quite advanced stages of decommissioning in the United States and several European countries Decommissioning practices are maturing and experience is being exchanged to the point where the processes can now be considered a predictable part of the life cycle of a reactor The decommissioning of a nuclear power plant or other nuclear installation generates a significant amount of radioactive waste, most of it low-level waste The spent fuel in the reactor is the largest source of radioactivity and with its removal the total radioactivity inventory of the site is reduced by about 99%. Large components such as the reactor pressure vessel and the steam generators are also treated as radioactive waste though their size presents unique issues. They can be reduced by cutting them into more manageable sizes or can, as is commonly done, be removed and transported to low-level waste repositories intact. One decommissioning issue currently under discussion is an internationally agreed-upon criterion below which slightly contaminated materials can be released from radiological regulatory control. On one side of this issue, free release and recycling of large volumes of slightly contaminated concrete and metals from decommissioning would significantly reduce the costs of disposal of these materials and pose only very low radiological hazards. On the other side, the public assessment of what is a justifiable and acceptable risk has, in most cases, resulted in governments deciding against the free release of such decommissioning waste and, consequently, they are typically disposed of in low-level waste repositories Radioactive waste results from any activity that makes use of nuclear materials, be it nuclear reactors or medical and industrial uses. Whatever its origin, it has to be managed safely and economically, as well as in an environmentally and publicly acceptable manner. Radioactive waste is normally classified into a small number of categories to facilitate regulation of handling, storage and disposal, based on the concentration of radioactive material they contain and the time for which they remain radioactive. The definitions of categories differ from country to country; however, in general, they can be addressed as low-level, intermediate-level and high-level waste Low-level waste (LLW) normally consists of items that have come into contact with small amounts of short-lived radioactivity, such as overalls, containers, syringes, etc. LLW can generally be handled using rubber gloves. Much of the waste generated during decommissioning of a nuclear power plant is managed as LLW. Intermediate-level waste (ILW) is typically more industrial, e.g. equipment that has been used in conjunction with nuclear materials or spent ion-exchange resins used in the clean-up of radioactive liquids. It typically generates negligible heat, but emits radiation, which may be short or long-lived, and usually requires shielding to protect people. In the case of reprocessing, a waste is produced consisting of the non-dissolved metal structure of the fuel (called hulls and end-pieces) that is categorised as ILW. High-level waste (HLW) consists mainly of highly radioactive and often long-lived remnants of the fission process. It must be heavily shielded and generally requires cooling. Within the HLW category, a distinction is made between spent nuclear fuel (SNF) that will not be reprocessed and the remnants of reprocessing. Though the two subsets are in many respects managed similarly, they are different in form and content, not least because the reprocessing remnants are most often initially in liquid form. For the handling or transport of waste, the important factor is its radioactivity level. But for disposal, another important factor is the length of time that a waste must be kept isolated, as determined by the half-lives of the radioactive isotopes it contains. Some long-lived isotopes such as those found in HLW and SNF require isolation for thousands of years. The half-life of a radioactive isotope is the time it takes for half of any given number of atoms to decay. This can vary from less than one second to infinity (i.e. stable) according to the isotope. Figure 4.1 shows that after five half-lives, the amount of a radioactive isotope remaining is about 3% of the original amount; after 10 half-lives, less than 0.1% remains. Table 4.1 shows some isotopes that are important in determining conditions for disposal of HLW and SNF. Caesium, strontium and technetium are fission products; the others result from neutron capture Because of its high energy density, nuclear energy generates a relatively low volume of waste pe nevertheless gives a general idea of the volumes of waste generated in producing nuclear energy. There has been a general trend towards a reduction in the volume of waste generated per unit of electricity through improved practices and technologies, in part, as a means to reduce operation and maintenance expenses. To put these quantities into perspective, it should be borne in mind that large quantities of radioactive waste are also generated by factories, hospitals and cancer treatment centres, and that radioactive waste as a Managing and disposing of radioactive waste is everywhere regarded as a national responsibility. Although there are different national approaches to waste management, international co-operation has created a set of fundamental principles and obligations that form a common understanding; the IAEA Principles of Radioactive Waste Management are an example. Whole is only a small fraction of the toxic waste generated industrially each year, and a smaller fraction by far of society’s total waster unit of energy generated. Different reactor and fuel cycles produce different amounts and types of waste. In broad summary, the tenor of this document is that radioactive waste should be managed so as to ensure that there is an acceptable level of protection for human health and for the environment, applying across national boundaries. The impact on future generations is no greater than that acceptable today, and that undue burdens on future generations are avoided. There is an appropriate national, legal framework with clear allocation of responsibilities and provision for independent regulation. Generation of waste is kept to the minimum practicable, with the interdependencies among the various necessary steps take n into account. The safety of facilities for management of waste is appropriately assured Existing facilities can, with foresight and good practice, reduce the amount of waste created. New technologies and plant designs also aim for waste reduction through such means as simplifying maintenance requirements. Conditioning and packaging Solid LLW and ILW can be super-compacted into much smaller volumes. Since waste in liquid form cannot in practice be disposed of, it needs to be transformed into solids. The radioactive elements can be removed from the liquid by filtration or ion exchange and then dried, absorbed into a fixing medium, or solidified in concrete. After conditioning, ILW or LLW can be packaged for interim storage or disposal in steel drums or boxes. For example, the metallic remnants of	 Storage differs from disposal in that there is an intent to retrieve the waste sometime in the future. Thus, active monitoring, maintenance and institutional controls must be maintained for safety and security. When a disposal site is available, ILW and LLW can be sent there directly at regular intervals. If not, interim storage in a structure above ground is necessary. For HLW and SNF, interim storage to permit decay of radiation and heat generation has always been recognised as necessary. Interim storage of waste may be required and can be safely accomplished for many decades Disposal is the final step in radioactive waste management. Usually it is understood to mean putting waste away without any intention of retrieving it, and that long-term surveillance and monitoring will not be needed to keep it safely isolated from the public and the environment. Radioactive waste is disposed of in dedicated facilities, and is not mixed with non-radioactive waste. Short-lived ILW and LLW are disposed of routinely at numerous sites in many countries (see Table 4.3); some sites have already been filled and closed. Most facilities are near-surface and usually equipped with simple engineered barriers to improve isolation – typically a lining of concrete or some other material in the disposal trenches. Spaces between waste packages are often filled with soil, clay or concrete. Low permeability covers are added to minimise water entry, and drainage systems divert water away from the disposal trenches or units. These precautions extend the life of the waste packaging and are intended to prevent the possibility of migration of radioactivity from the site. Nevertheless, it is expected that for a period of about 100 to 300 years following closure of an ILW/LLW disposal site active or passive controls will be applied, including groundwater monitoring, restrictions on access, periodic maintenance and restrictions on further land use. After this period the radioactive isotopes will have decayed to negligible levels Solutions for long-lived waste, either HLW and SNF, or long-lived ILW, have proved more elusive. No repository for SNF and HLW has yet been opened anywhere, though disposal of long-lived, defence-related waste in the United States does exist. Many countries (including Belgium, Canada, China, Finland, France, Germany, Japan, Russia, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States) have set up programs to develop disposal of long-lived waste. The main disposal concept under active consideration for long-lived waste is burial deep underground, i.e. deep geological disposal, to ensure security and containment over long timescales The desired result is a long-lasting, passively safe system imposing no burden of care on future generations and ensuring that no significant radioactivity returns to the surface environment. The main issue of this approach is that the public lacks confidence that understanding geological processes and material properties is sufficient to guarantee containment over the long timescales being considered chosen for their long-term stability, as well as their ability to accommodate a facility of sufficient size and to prevent or severely attenuate any eventual release of radioactivity. A key feature is low groundwater flow, this potentially being the most likely pathway for migration to the human environment. The main types of formation studied so far are salt, sedimentary foundations such as clay and shale, crystalline formations such as granite, and volcanic formations such as basalt and tuff. A number of container designs and materials have been proposed, depending on the geological environment and the specific safety function attributed to them. The engineered barriers are intended to delay access of groundwater. They can also provide chemical conditions that ensure that, in the unlikely event that any waste escapes the packaging, it would not readily dissolve and that any dissolved waste would become immobilised Since the timeframes involved in geological disposal are well beyond recorded human experience and the chemical and physical interactions complex, demonstrating that a geological disposal site will remain safe over its existence is difficult. Defining appropriate models and obtaining the data necessary for performance assessment are major challenges The timescale over which a repository must be demonstrated to perform safely differs between countries – 10 000 years has been specified by some countries, though some require longer, and others have specified no limit. Any prediction so many years into the future necessarily amounts more to a qualitative indication of safety than a precise prediction of the behaviour of the repository. However, even allowing for uncertainties of several orders of magnitude, calculated releases have been shown to be clearly within acceptable limits. Technical confidence in the practicality of geological disposal stems from basic scientific knowledge of geology, hydrology, material sciences and geochemistry, reinforced by research underground. Laboratories, mostly established in used mines, have helped to obtain information on site-specific characteristics and to test the models used to assure performance In 1999, the United States began disposal of waste containing long-lived, non-heat-emitting radioactive waste from defence-related activities at the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP) in New Mexico, in caverns 650 metres below ground in a salt formation. In 2002, the United States officially proposed the Yucca Mountain site to serve as a national repository for HLW and SNF following a comprehensive investigation; but a decision to proceed will require a finding by the independent nuclear safety regulator that the facility is safe, and this will take several more years. In 2001, the Finnish Parliament took a decision in principle to proceed with implementation of a geological repository for SNF at Eurajoki, where the local community has agreed to host a national repository Because of the comparatively small volumes of radioactive waste and the need for long-term isolation, centralised storage and disposal is generally practised. This in turn necessitates transport to the chosen localities. Radioactive materials used in industrial and medical applications also require transport between the supplier and user. The safe transport of radioactive materials is primarily a national responsibility. Nevertheless, nearly 60 countries apply the IAEA Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material, which serve to harmonise and standardise transport practices. Additionally, the International Civil Aviation Organisation (188 contracting parties) and the International Maritime Organisation (162 member states) incorporate these IAEA principles making their adherence mandatory in air and sea transport. These regulations embody the basic principle that safety is dependent on the packaging of the radioactive material, regardless of how it is transported. With traffic accidents being probable at some stage, this principle works to prevent any radiological consequences even if the package were to be involved in a severe accident. The requirements and controls are proportioned to the hazard presented by the material. For example, some shipments of medical isotopes may be shipped in fairly unsophisticated cardboard packages, though the radioactive contents are strictly limited, there must be clear labelling, the packages must be certified for transport, and the shippers must have documentation to that effect. Spent nuclear fuel or high-level waste, on the other hand, must be shipped in high integrity containers designed to shield people and assure containment under extreme accident conditions Radioactive waste management has sometimes been called the “Achilles heel” of nuclear energy because of the perceived absence of disposal facilities. There has been difficulty in achieving social and political confidence in strategies to protect present and future generations from any risk. Technical experts have confidence that removing highly radioactive waste from the human environment by disposal in deep geological repositories is ethically and environmentally sound, and that the technology is both well developed and trustworthy However, many people do not share this confidence. Communicating with the public remains a key issue and a challenge to nuclear energy. However remote the risks to human populations from the disposal of long-lived radionuclides, a portion of public opinion feels that they represent a kind of burden on future generations that is ethically unsatisfactory. Others tend to regard risks of this low order, applying to generations whose physical environment and technical capabilities we cannot possibly envisage, as being negligible in the scale of the risks that future generations must bear. In any case, this conflict of philosophies is hindering the adoption of disposal solutions. Yet, the fact remains that this waste exists, and solutions will need to be decided upon at some point. Other aspects of waste disposal currently under debate include long-term storage while waiting for disposal; permitting the reversibility of disposal actions; and the desirability of repositories that would serve multiple countries. The near-term alternative to disposal of HLW and SNF is its long-term storage above ground. This is generally acknowledged to be technically feasible and indeed, represents existing practice. However, long-term storage has generally been regarded as a “second best” solution. The need to maintain security and environmental surveillance on the site increases costs. The unavoidable deterioration of the storage facilities and the waste packages they contain leaves to future generations the costs and risks of their periodic replacement and this option leaves open the question of the disposal of the waste should this eventually be decided upon. It remains, nonetheless, an attainable procedure either on a medium-term or on a semi-permanent basis Nuclear energy installations, whether they be nuclear power plants, reprocessing or waste conditioning plants or spent fuel storage facilities, typically involve large amounts of radioactivity whose release could produce radioactive contamination of the environment and be injurious to people’s health. The primary purpose of all nuclear safety measures is thus to ensure that radioactivity remains in all circumstances contained or, if released, then only in amounts and under controls that ensure no significant harm is done. In general terms, then, the safety of a nuclear installation can be understood as the ability of the installation’s systems and its personnel to prevent accidents from occurring, or should one occur, to mitigate its consequences to a minimum. Ultimately, the radiological impact on people and the environment resulting from operating nuclear installations must be as small as possible for both normal operation and potential accidents. To achieve this objective, or in other words to ensure that the installation is considered sufficiently safe, technical and organisational measures are put in place at all stages of a nuclear facility’s lifetime: starting with its siting and design; its manufacturing, construction and commissioning; during operation; and finally, its decommissioning. An accident at a nuclear power plant has a greater potential to do harm than accidents in other types of nuclear installation, since the fission process produces a major concentration of radioactivity. Additionally, large energies are involved, and the process liquids and gases could be agents in dispersing the radioactivity over wide areas. Much of the discussion that follows therefore relates primarily to nuclear power plants, but the same principles and approaches apply to other nuclear installations. 
The continuous availability and reliable operation of the engineered systems are key elements of defence in depth, and their operation is regularly tested. Design of these systems must ensure that the failure of any single safety component would not cause loss of function (single failure criterion). Moreover, the safety systems are designed by applying the principles of redundancy, i.e. providing additional backups or greater strength than is needed based on already pessimistic assumptions Taking these concerns in order, multiple barriers are provided to prevent the release of radioactivity. The primary containment barriers against a release of radioactivity are the fuel matrix and its hermetic container – the fuel cladding. Next is the robust reactor pressure boundary within which the coolant circulates during normal operation, particularly the pressure vessel that contains the reactor core itself. Normally, the ultimate barrier is the containment building, typically a large reinforced concrete structure designed both to retain the products of an unconfined radioactive release and to protect the structures that constitute the pressure boundary from external hazards such as missiles, fires or explosions .In the Three Mile Island accident in 1979, one of two very serious accidents to have occurred in commercial nuclear power stations, the reactor pressure vessel and containment building successfully prevented any injury to the public, though serious core damage had occurred releasing both intense heat and radioactivity common cause failure by the provision of several pathways to operation; and the physical separation of safety systems from plant process systems. Underlying all this is conservatism in all assumptions about risks of failure, the practice of basing design safety on a “what if?” approach and the close analysis of previous component and materials performance. Such an assessment is conducted before a design is finalised, so as to confirm the plant’s ability to operate easily within prescribed operating and regulatory limits given the characteristics of the proposed site. These assessments are documented in “safety analysis reports” or “safety cases”. These are critically reviewed by regulatory authorities prior to licensing; afterwards they constitute the baseline point of reference for the safe operation of the plant. National regulations also frequently require that systematic safety assessments be made periodically throughout the lifetime of any nuclear plant, together with self-assessments by operators, to ensure that plants can continue to operate in accordance with their safety cases and other operating requirements Commissioning is an important stage in the completion of a nuclear power plant. The reactor power is gradually increased to specified levels and the as-built operating characteristics of the process and safety systems are determined, documented and checked against pre-defined success criteria. A large number of specific tests are conducted to verify the functioning of components and systems and the overall behaviour of the plant; weaknesses are corrected, and the tests repeated until satisfactorily completed. Extensive testing is also conducted after major maintenance operations or the replacement or upgrading of components High-quality equipment is a prerequisite for reliable operation. Thus, quality assurance is a vital component of nuclear safety. A special set of codes and standards has been developed for the equipment and components used in any nuclear facility. These demand rigorous testing to confirm that quality standards are met, and their criteria ensure that only well-proven and established technologies are employed. National regulatory authorities oversee the implementation of these quality assurance and control programs, whose extra cost accounts for a significant part of the high cost of constructing and maintaining a nuclear facility. Such an assessment is conducted before a design is finalised, so as to confirm the plant’s ability to operate easily within prescribed operating and regulatory limits given the characteristics of the proposed site. These assessments are documented in “safety analysis reports” or “safety cases”. These are critically reviewed by regulatory authorities prior to licensing; afterwards they constitute the baseline point of reference for the safe operation of the plant. National regulations also frequently require that systematic safety assessments be made periodically throughout the lifetime of any nuclear plant, together with self-assessments by operators, to ensure that plants can continue to operate in accordance with their safety cases and other operating requirements. It has been common practice since the 1980s to complement the deterministic analysis using a type of analysis called probabilistic safety assessments (PSA). In a PSA, all types of circumstances, including equipment failures and human errors that can lead to an accident, are analysed. The combinations of events and failures that can potentially lead to severe accidents are also identified and their probability of occurrence estimated. The results of these studies are used for a variety of purposes, such as prioritising plant safety improvements, training operators and setting inspection priorities. Experience has shown that a weak “safety culture” is in many cases a root cause of declining safety performance. Despite all the systems-based safeguards, it is the people involved who are the ultimate guarantors of the safety of any nuclear plant. The existence of a good safety culture, which strongly influences the attitudes and states of mind of all the individuals whose actions can impact on safety, is a key nuclear safety principle. The attributes of a good safety culture include a strong sense of responsibility, self-discipline and respect for regulatory requirements on the part of individuals, but management style is also an essential component. Safety culture is not inherent and as it is linked to national habits and attitudes, it cannot be acquired in a short period of time or “installed” like a piece of hardware. It must be transmitted continuously and unmistakably from the top, and permeate the whole of the operating and regulatory organisations. A great deal of information and many lessons have been gathered from over 10 000 reactor years of operating experience worldwide. These lessons are routinely shared through such means as databases and reports by international organisations, journals and conferences. A significant result has been a steady improvement in the operating safety performance of nuclear plants, particularly in recent years. For example, the number of unplanned automatic scrams has been decreasing over the past decade, indicating a widespread improvement in plant The overall good safety record of commercial nuclear power plants is marred by two severe accidents – those at Three Mile Island (TMI) in the United States in 1979 and at Chernobyl in Ukraine (former Soviet Union) in 1986. The TMI accident resulted in serious damage to the reactor core but the reactor pressure vessel and containment building prevented all but trace amounts of radioactive gases from being released and caused no effect on the population. It was subsequently rated 5 on the INES scale. The Chernobyl accident was on any reckoning a disaster and the only event ever rated above 5 (at 7). At Chernobyl, there was a meltdown of the nuclear fuel that combined with a steam explosion, and the lack of a complete containment building resulted in large amounts of solid and gaseous radioactive materials being widely distributed over Europe. These two accidents provided important lessons. The TMI accident emphasised the need for greater attention to the human factors, including improved operator qualification and training and better emergency procedures and public communication. The Chernobyl accident, as well as publicising weaknesses in the RBMK reactor design (not present in OECD countries), led to the recognition of the importance of safety culture. It showed that a weak safety culture not only among operators, but also stemming from weak management and distracting external influences, could lead to operational behaviour breaching every element of defence in depth. Impact of market deregulation on safety There has been a growing recent trend towards opening electricity markets to competitive supply and pricing. While there are few doubts that economic deregulation will improve the overall economic effectiveness of electricity production, its impact on nuclear safety is a matter for discussion. Early indications are that regulatory compliance and competitive economic performance are not in conflict, though an independent and vigilant oversight is necessary to ensure that this remains so. Regulatory bodies may need to develop and adapt their regulations and staff to meet the changing market circumstances in order to ensure that effective oversight is maintained while not unnecessarily impacting on an operator’s ability to compete in an open market action. Over the next few decades new reactor designs may be introduced to compete with other sources of electricity. These advanced designs will be faced with the challenge of cutting generating costs while maintaining or improving safety levels. Various concepts of the next generation of nuclear power reactors have been proposed and are being studied.	The universe is awash with radiation, as is the earth and the living creatures on it. Since man’s discovery of their existence in the late 1800s, many uses for radiation and radioactivity have been discovered and exploited. Medical science was among the first to make use of the penetrating properties of radiation; the use of X-rays revolutionised the study and treatment of the human body. But very early on, it was discovered that along with the benefits came risks, and thus the need to protect people from radiation. Ever since, the use of radiation has been a matter of balancing benefits and risks. To assist this balancing, the theory, policy, regulation and practice of radiological protection has been developed, always alongside an evolving understanding of the sources, uses and effects of radiation Radiation is energy travelling through space or matter in the form of sub-atomic particles or electromagnetic waves. Radioactivity is the spontaneous change in the nucleus of an unstable atom that results in the emission of radiation. This process of change is often referred to as the “decay” of atoms. Radioactive atoms are often called “radionuclides” or “radioactive isotopes” of the relevant chemical element. When radiation, either particles or electromagnetic waves, has enough energy to remove the electrons of atoms with which it interacts, it causes the atoms to become charged, or “ionised”, and it is called ionising radiation. The ions resulting from the interaction are capable of causing chemical changes damaging to human cells. If radiation, either particles or electromagnetic waves, has insufficient energy to ionise atoms, it is known as non-ionising radiation. Ionising radiation occurs in several forms – as alpha particles, beta particles or neutrons, or in the form of electromagnetic radiation (gamma rays and X-rays). Each type of ionising radiation interacts differently with matter, including the human body, and each can be effectively stopped by different types of material (see Figure 6.1). Alpha particles are emitted from the nucleus of an atom and consist of two protons and two neutrons. They are identical to the nucleus of a helium atom and have a double positive charge. Because they are heavy and doubly charged, they lose their energy very quickly in matter. A sheet of 49 Radiological Protection Radiation is everywhere and it has been found useful for medical and industrial purposes. It is one of the most studied risks to health and these risks are increasingly well understood. There are many types of radiation, some more harmful than others, and many ways of assuring the safe, beneficial use of radiation and radiation-generating processes. Radiological protection of the public, environment and workers is a prime safety objective for the nuclear power industry. Systematic approaches to radiation protection are based on three principles: the justification of practices, the optimisation of protection and the limitation of exposures. Chapter 6 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 22/05/03 14:03 Page 49 paper or a person’s surface layer of dead skin will stop them. Alpha particles are only considered hazardous to a person’s health if they are ingested or inhaled and thus come into contact with sensitive cells. Beta particles are electrons emitted from the nucleus of an atom. They have only one negative charge, which causes them to interact less with matter than alpha particles and thus penetrate further. They will be stopped by thin layers of plastic or metal, and again, are considered hazardous mainly if a beta-emitter is ingested or inhaled. They can, however, cause radiation damage to the skin if the exposure is large enough. Neutrons are contained in the nucleus of an atom, from which they may be expelled by collision, or fission. They are electrically neutral particles with approximately the same mass as a proton, and, being neutral, interact only weakly with matter and are thus very penetrating – not easy to stop. They are best shielded by thick layers of concrete, or by materials rich in hydrogen atoms, such as water or oil. Gamma rays and X-rays are both electromagnetic waves, the one being emitted from the nucleus of an atom, the other by energy changes in an atom’s electrons. Both are forms of high-energy electromagnetic radiation that interact lightly with matter. They are best stopped by thick layers of lead or other dense materials, and are hazardous to people even when their emitters are external to the body Radiation is energy travelling through space or matter in the form of sub-atomic particles or electromagnetic waves. Radioactivity is the spontaneous change in the nucleus of an unstable atom that results in the emission of radiation. This process of change is often referred to as the “decay” of atoms. Radioactive atoms are often called “radionuclides” or “radioactive isotopes” of the relevant chemical element. When radiation, either particles or electromagnetic waves, has enough energy to remove the electrons of atoms with which it interacts, it causes the atoms to become charged, or “ionised”, and it is called ionising radiation. The ions resulting from the interaction are capable of causing chemical changes damaging to human cells. If radiation, either particles or electromagnetic waves, has insufficient energy to ionise atoms, it is known as non-ionising radiation. Ionising radiation occurs in several forms – as alpha particles, beta particles or neutrons, or in the form of electromagnetic radiation (gamma rays and X-rays). Each type of ionising radiation interacts differently with matter, including the human body, and each can be effectively stopped by different types of material (see Figure 6.1). Alpha particles are emitted from the nucleus of an atom and consist of two protons and two neutrons. They are identical to the nucleus of a helium atom and have a double positive charge. Because they are heavy and doubly charged, they lose their energy very quickly in matter. A sheet of 49 Radiological Protection Radiation is everywhere and it has been found useful for medical and industrial purposes. It is one of the most studied risks to health and these risks are increasingly well understood. There are many types of radiation, some more harmful than others, and many ways of assuring the safe, beneficial use of radiation and radiation-generating processes. Radiological protection of the public, environment and workers is a prime safety objective for the nuclear power industry. Systematic approaches to radiation protection are based on three principles: the justification of practices, the optimisation of protection and the limitation of exposures. Chapter 6 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 22/05/03 14:03 Page 49 paper or a person’s surface layer of dead skin will stop them. Alpha particles are only considered hazardous to a person’s health if they are ingested or inhaled and thus come into contact with sensitive cells. Beta particles are electrons emitted from the nucleus of an atom. They have only one negative charge, which causes them to interact less with matter than alpha particles and thus penetrate further. They will be stopped by thin layers of plastic or metal, and again, are considered hazardous mainly if a beta-emitter is ingested or inhaled. They can, however, cause radiation damage to the skin if the exposure is large enough. Neutrons are contained in the nucleus of an atom, from which they may be expelled by collision, or fission. They are electrically neutral particles with approximately the same mass as a proton, and, being neutral, interact only weakly with matter and are thus very penetrating – not easy to stop. They are best shielded by thick layers of concrete, or by materials rich in hydrogen atoms, such as water or oil. Gamma rays and X-rays are both electromagnetic waves, the one being emitted from the nucleus of an atom, the other by energy changes in an atom’s electrons. Both are forms of high-energy electromagnetic radiation that interact lightly with matter. They are best stopped by thick layers of lead or other dense materials, and are hazardous to people even when their emitters are external to the body Natural radiation, which may be either ionising or non-ionising, can be characterised either as “cosmic” or “terrestrial”. Cosmic radiation comes from the heavens and is generated through various processes including the birth and death of stars. The biggest emitter of cosmic radiation, so far as we on earth are concerned, is the sun. Terrestrial radiation comes from the earth itself, and is produced by the decay of primordial and cosmogenic radionuclides embedded in the earth’s crust. Two common elements, uranium and thorium, emit ionising radiation as they gradually decay over millions of years, eventually becoming lead – which is stable and therefore emits no radiation. One of the members of the uranium decay chain is radon, a gas that enters the atmosphere if it is “born” near the surface of the earth. So radiation is not only emitted directly from its sources in the earth, but forms part of the atmosphere we breathe, in greater or lesser quantity according to the amounts and types of radioactive materials in the part of the earth where we happen to be. Even our food is naturally radioactive, since plants and animals absorb radioactive materials from the environment. As a result, our own bodies and particularly our bones contain small amounts of radioactive elements like carbon-14, potassium-40 and radium-226. Potassium is an important nutritive mineral; bananas, for example are a rich source of potassium, including the radioactive isotope potassium-40. Tritium, a naturally occurring and man-made radioactive isotope of hydrogen that forms part of all water on earth, is also found in small amounts in our bodies, mostly in the soft tissues and bloodstream. Man-made radiation The development of nuclear energy and science has created various new sources of radiation, manmade radiation. Nuclear weapons tests, initially conducted above ground, resulted in large quantities of radioactive material being thrown into the upper atmosphere where it encircled the globe. Most of the population of the Northern Hemisphere and some of the Southern was, and continues to be, exposed to radiation from this material. The development of nuclear power since the 1950s has also led to releases of radioactivity into the atmosphere and into water from various stages of the fuel cycle, largely from the reprocessing of spent fuel and to a lesser extent from fuel manufacture and power production. Radiation has been extensively used in medicine since its discovery. The use of X-rays involves a very significant exposure to ionising radiation; a recent development is the use of real-time television X-ray images in the operating room to help guide the surgeon in positioning surgical instruments. Other sophisticated medical uses of gamma rays include computerised tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography (PET). Radiation is also used in therapy, precisely because it can kill cells – such as tumour cells. Radiation sources can be surgically implanted in tumours, and liquid radiation sources can be injected into the bloodstream and concentrate in target cells – a practice used to cure thyroid cancer. All these procedures are sources of ionising radiation both to the patient and to medical staff. Levels of radiation exposure To what levels of radiation are humans typically exposed, and what are the most important sources? The United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR) has gathered this information since 1955 and produces a report about every four years summarising the average exposures from all sources. Figure 6.2 summarises the results of the latest such report, UNSCEAR 2000. Our exposure to these various natural and manmade sources of radiation may of course be either voluntary or involuntary. Effects of radiation exposure The principal result of radiation passing through something – such as human tissue – is the deposition of energy. Radiation loses energy as it interacts with matter and the matter gains this energy. So the unit used to measure radiation exposure is based on the amount of energy absorbed. Nowadays, radiation exposure (also referred to as “dose”) is measured in grays (Gy). One gray is defined as an absorption of radiation which deposits one joule of energy in one kilogram of material. Some types of ionising radiation are more damaging than others. For example, alpha particles, because of their large mass and electrical charge tend to deposit lots of energy over very short distances, and they can thus cause significant damage if they travel through sensitive biological tissue. Neutrons, on the other hand, interact very infrequently with atoms but when they do, the effects can be significant. For these physical reasons, the different types of radiation have been given different weighting factors that are used to relate their physically deposited energy to the biological significance of the damage they cause. The unit used to measure this biological significance is the sievert (Sv). The sievert is equal to the amount of energy deposited, in greys, multiplied by the relevant weighting factor; the higher the factor, the greater the reckoned damage. For alpha particles the factor is 20; for neutrons it is in the 5-20 range varying with their energy; for gamma rays, beta rays and X-rays, the factor is 1. In estimating damage, account also has to be taken of whether the whole body is exposed or only a part, and if so, which part. Different tissues (e.g. lungs, liver, bones) have different sensitivities to radiation damage. For example, the most biologically significant radiation emitted by uranium are alpha particles. These cannot even penetrate a person’s skin, so exposure to uranium dust on the skin is generally not hazardous. But if the same dust is inhaled and ends up next to sensitive lung tissue it can be very damaging to the cells exposed. In this case, primarily one tissue is exposed, and the deposited energy is limited to it alone. To allow this exposure to be equated to others, researchers have developed tissue weighting factors. This allows for the comparison and summation of the biological significance of an exposure to one type of radiation affecting the whole body with exposure of another type that has affected only a particular organ. This makes it possible to represent the biological significance of different exposures to radiation on a single scale Radiation is one of the most studied of all toxic agents. Although it cannot be touched, tasted or smelled, it happens – unlike, for example, cancer causing chemicals – to be very easy to identify and quantify. The physics of radiation passing through matter is also very well understood, and this makes it scientifically possible to study the effects that different amounts of radiation exposure can have on humans. However, the physics of radiation are just the beginning of the story. Looking at it more closely, the energy from ionising radiation is transferred to the atoms of the substance through which it passes. Water is the most abundant molecule in our bodies, and is quite often ionised, i.e. made abnormally chemically reactive by radiation. If the water molecule in question happens to be located next to a molecule of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) within a human tissue cell, it might damage it – and DNA is the cell’s engine of reproduction. It follows that there can be three principal results to a body cell that is damaged by radiation The potential for long-term effects lies in the third case; the damage may cause the cell to become cancerous. Additionally, if the damaged cell is a human reproductive cell – an egg or a sperm cell – the damage to the DNA could potentially result in a genetic mutation. It is these two potential effects that are the principal concern of radiation health scientists. When people are exposed to ionising radiation, the possible effects on their health can be categorised as follows For humans, the threshold level of radiation exposure that results in deterministic effects is around 0.25 sievert . Depending on the amount of the dose above this threshold, different types of biological reaction will occur, the effects increasing in severity as the dose increases Fortunately, accidents involving such high radiation exposures are very rare, and the medical treatments for highly exposed people have advanced greatly and continue to do so. Stochastic effects are not certain to occur, but their chance of occurrence increases with increasing exposure. The important types of 52 No repair All damage repaired, cell regains health Cell damaged by radiation Dead cell Damaged cell Possible cancer development Partial loss of cell functions Possible genetic effects (if sperm or egg cell) Figure 6.3: Potential biological results after radiation damages a cell Radionuclides that enter the body can remain for some time, being eliminated through biological functions and through radioactive decay. To account for the doses caused by these radionuclides and to ensure that associated risks are not underestimated, it is assumed for regulatory purposes that the exposure that would accrue over the 50 years after the intake occurs in the single year of the intake. This calculated internal exposure is known as “committed” dose. 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 22/05/03 14:03 Page 52 stochastic effects are cancers, including leukaemia. Should reproductive cells be exposed, genetic modifications can theoretically occur, though none have ever been observed in any studied human population, including the survivors of Hiroshima, Nagasaki and Chernobyl A fair amount is known about the effects of large radiation doses received instantaneously. Over the 55 years or more since the atomic bombing of Japan, the 100 000 exposed survivors have been medically monitored. About 20% of the deaths in this population have been due to some form of cancer – approximately the same percentage of deaths from cancer as is average for any group of similar composition in any Western society. However, when the comparison is made with similar Japanese populations that were not exposed to the bombing, it has been concluded that about 400 of the cancer deaths in the group of atomic bomb survivors can be attributed to radiation received in the bomb blasts. Using the information gathered from high-dose accidents, including the Japan bombings, it has been possible to develop a dose-response curve, a graph that correlates the predicted number of cancer deaths to calculated individual exposures. This curve has been used to predict and describe the excess risk of cancer death associated with any given level of exposure. For every sievert of exposure, the risk above the “normal” 20% chance of dying from cancer is an additional 5%, that is, the total lifetime risk from cancer raises from 20% to 25% for every sievert of exposure received As with scientific study in general, there are things that are known and things that are not known about the biological effects of radiation. The statistics so far considered are based on relatively high doses and it is known how much increased cancer risk can be attributed to high radiation exposures. What is not known is whether similar significant effects can result from low doses of radiation such as we all naturally receive from background radiation, or that certain workers may receive as part of their jobs. The data from the high-dose groups show a definite link between the amount of the dose and an increased risk of cancer starting from about 100 mSv above natural background levels. For exposures below this level studies to date have not demonstrated any statistical evidence of harm. In the many studies of populations that have received radiation doses below 100 mSv, no increases of cancer have been observed compared to similar populations not exposed to this “extra” radiation. However, because it is known that radiation can cause cancer at the higher doses, and because our understanding of the relevant biological mechanisms is incomplete, we cannot reasonably assume that cancer cannot be caused by low doses of radiation. So it has always been deemed prudent to assume that every dose received, no matter how small, carries a certain risk proportionate to the dose. It is, in other words, assumed that there is no threshold of safety; that is, that there is no dose, however small, at which there is no risk. These two assumptions, that any radiation dose carries some risk and that the risk is proportionate to the dose, are known as the linear no-threshold hypothesis (LNT). This hypothesis forms an important basis for the regulation and application of radiological protection and is conservative in nature. In the absence of conclusive scientific evidence either for or against the existence of cancer risks at low doses, a prudent, precautionary approach has been taken. The objective of radiological protection is to protect people from potentially harmful effects of radiation while allowing beneficial exposure causing activity to take place. The radiological protection system applied worldwide has developed since its origins in 1928 – with the creation of the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) at the International Congress of Radiology, through applying the knowledge gained by numerous studies of exposed populations such as those mentioned above, and through studies of the effects of radiation on plants, insects and animals. This worldwide system is now based on three basic principles  justification of practices causing exposure  optimisation of protection  limitation of the exposure of individuals. This approach, as codified in the Recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP), has been implemented in virtually all national regulatory arrangements. The ICRP meets annually and publishes recommendations as needed to respond to new developments. The current system of radiological protection is evolving and is expected to undergo major revision with a new set of ICRP recommendations by 2005. Among other improvements, the radiological protection of non-human species will be specifically addressed. ICRP Recommendations are also reflected in international standards, such as the IAEA’s Basic Safety Standards (BSS) and regional agreements such as European Union directives The principle is that no practice should be allowed unless it is justified. In such a matter, decision criteria cannot rest on scientific considerations alone, but necessarily include social, economic and ethical factors. The scientific community can assess and inform about the risks, but ultimately it is society, through its consensus building processes that has to decide whether a risk-causing practice is justified, and the process is essentially judgemental. The principle is applied on a case-by-case basis, the important point being that those who take decisions to expose people must be prepared to advance their reasons, as well as to accept that these may be challenged. To take a general case, the medical use of X-rays is routinely taken to be justifiable, but medical staff are expected to consider the value of each exposure before they apply it. They must weigh the very slight increased risk of causing a cancer against the benefit they expect from a precise diagnosis. Similarly, in many countries, the benefit of using nuclear energy to produce electricity in the light of its risks has been challenged and public policy decisions taken. Optimisation The principle of optimising protection applies only for practices that have been judged to be justified. It requires that all resulting exposures be kept as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA). Practically speaking, the ALARA principle resolves itself into the questions “Has enough been done to reduce exposure in this particular case? Might it be possible and reasonable to reduce exposure further?” It should be noted that the objective of optimisation, or ALARA, is not to reduce exposures to zero, but to ensure that the risks are reduced to an acceptable level in the circumstances of each case. What is acceptable is a matter of scientific and social judgement. Various means can be employed to do this, such as minimising the size of the radiation source, limiting the time a person is exposed, maximising the distance between people and radiation sources, using shielding, etc. The number of people exposed in any operation and the geographic distribution of doses (e.g. exposure of the public to radiation over any particular geographic area) are also important considerations of the optimisation process. Limitation Over and above the principle that doses must be optimised using the ALARA test, individuals must not be exposed above stipulated dose limits. Exposure limits for members of the public have been fixed nationally and internationally at 1 mSv per year. For radiation workers the international limit is a total of 100 mSv over any five-year period, without exceeding 50 mSv in any one year. Some national regulators have implemented a stricter limit for workers of 20 mSv per annum. In practice, the rigorous application of the ALARA principle and such things as the limitation of gaseous and liquid discharges have ensured that actual and average doses are normally far lower than these limits. As with highway speed limits, the dose limit is not a boundary above which dire consequences will occur, or below which they certainly will not. It simply represents a level above which societies and their national governments prefer not to go in routine circumstances. As with many other radiological decisions, it involves the best attainable scientific understanding of the risks but is ultimately judgemental. In summary, for any justified practice, radiological protection must be optimised such that all individual exposures are as low as reasonably achievable, but must also be below any relevant regulatory limits. Radiological protection in the nuclear industry Because uranium and its daughter isotopes naturally emit radiation and because nuclear fission emits radiation and creates waste that emits radiation, radiological protection is a central safety issue in the nuclear industry. However, the various sectors of the nuclear fuel cycle face different radiological protection issues. For example, the mining of uranium results in workers being exposed to dust containing uranium and its daughter products. These can be hazardous to the lungs from alpha-emitting radionuclides that may be inhaled, thus requiring adequate mine ventilation and worker respiratory protection. These same alpha-emitting radionuclides are also the main source of potential hazard during the front-end fuel cycle processes In nuclear power plants, radiation exposure of workers generally comes from more penetrating gamma-emitting radionuclides such as cobalt-60. Such radiation is limited, within the plants, to the piping and systems directly associated with cooling the reactor core. These generally only represent a hazard for workers during maintenance of these systems. During normal operation these systems are shielded, and workers are excluded from the hazardous areas. Worker protection is afforded during maintenance through the use of shielding and by appropriately selecting work tasks and managing work to minimise worker time in proximity to radiation-emitting sources. Exposure hazards from waste management operations, including spent fuel handling, results largely from gamma-emitting radionuclides. With LLW and ILW, cobalt-60 is a significant source of radiation. Fission products, e.g. caesium-137 and strontium-90, are the significant source of radiation connected with high-level waste and spent nuclear fuel. Radiation exposure associated with waste management is minimised through the use of specially designed facilities, equipment and procedures that keeps the radiation remote from the workers. Several parts of the nuclear fuel cycle release small quantities of radioactivity into the environment. These emissions come mostly from spent nuclear fuel reprocessing, but also from nuclear power plants during normal operation. As such, there is a need to minimise and measure these effluents in order to protect the public and environment. Filtering and purification of air and water effluents minimise these releases and extensive environmental monitoring around all nuclear installations verify that these are working appropriately. Accident response There is no such thing as zero risk for any human activity. Despite the very high levels of safety maintained in all radiological activity, accidents involving the exposure of workers and of the public can occur, and can possibly (like Chernobyl) have international scope. The international community has therefore developed detailed programs and approaches for nuclear emergency preparedness and nuclear accident management. The main objective of these programs and approaches is to minimise the consequences of any relevant event. Nuclear accident preparedness involves developing plans and procedures that can be put rapidly into action. This involves imagining and studying numerous “accident scenarios”, and then developing, in consultation with all the necessary services, a basic organisational structure and a set of planned responses variable according to circumstances. These flexible plans are then kept on “hot stand-by” and rehearsed. The organisational structures developed under preparedness programs include command and communications systems, the careful definition of the responsibilities of the various authorities and services likely to be involved, and the training of personnel. All nuclear installations around the world maintain such plans and structures in conjunction with local and national authorities. Those who would be involved in decision making during an incident train regularly with technical experts and with each other. In many countries, the public in the vicinity of nuclear plants is also kept informed and is involved in training exercises. Emergency response is the application of these measures according to the nature of the nuclear facility and of the accident (e.g. fire, unplanned criticality or radioactive release). Large nuclear installations, particularly power plants, are equipped with many barriers to halt the progression of an accident (see Chapter 5), and severe accidents, necessarily involving the successive failure of these systems, would be likely to develop over a considerable period before the public was directly threatened. There would usually be hours, even days, to warn of the need to take protective measures. There are three types of countermeasure that can be taken during the early stages of a nuclear or radiologic before a release and after the requisite meteorological judgements have been made about its likely direction and speed of dispersal. Administration of iodine tablets containing a non-radioactive, stable form of iodine. Taking stable iodine can greatly reduce the uptake of radioactive iodine that is produced by the fission process and would be an important part of any release resulting from a severe accident from a nuclear power plant. Iodine is used by the body for many purposes, and stored in the thyroid gland. So any radioactive iodine that enters the body concentrates in the thyroid, causing it a large dose that could lead to thyroid cancer, especially in children. Similarly, radioactive iodine deposited on the ground could enter the milk or other food supplies with similar results. The answer therefore is to “fill up” the thyroid gland with non-radioactive, stable iodine by taking iodine tablets; any surplus that then entered the body would be quickly eliminated, mostly in sweat and urine. In most countries, steps are now taken to ensure the speedy availability of iodine tablets to populations vulnerable to any significant release of fission products. The administration of iodine is, however, seen only as a measure additional to sheltering or evacuational emergency as follows Once an emergency situation is brought under control and the population protected, the long term work of recovery must begin. This would generally first involve establishing the levels of contamination deposited in the environment, assessing the doses that will have been received by individuals, and developing appropriate clean-up and medical follow-up programs. The clean-up of contaminated land, particularly land used for food production, would be an important part of these programs. Fortunately, the fact that radioactivity can be readily detected assists greatly in applying the many relevant clean-up techniques that exist. In the case of very severe contamination, as for example in the area surrounding the damaged Chernobyl reactor, a return to pre-accident levels and exposures might only be achievable through extreme measures such as the removal of all topsoil and vegetation or the voluntary curbing of consumption of local products The costs of generating electricity are usually broken down into three major categories, the costs of investment (capital); operation and maintenance; and fuel. Investment costs include those of design and construction, major refurbishing, and decommissioning. The last comprises all the costs incurred from the shutdown of the plant until the site is released in accordance with national policy and includes the costs to manage the radioactive and other waste generated during decommissioning until they are disposed of. To these costs are added those associated with securing regulatory approval to proceed with construction and operation. Investment costs must be financed, and they thus incur interest charges. These are amortised over some set period, perhaps on the order of 20-25 years, and the debt service becomes part of the costs of electricity generation. Provisions are also required to be set aside or paid by plant operators for decommissioning and disposal of its associated waste – processes that can take many decades. Operation and maintenance (O&M) costs include all costs that are not considered investment or fuel costs, the main elements being the costs of operating and support staff, training, security, health and safety, and management and disposal of operational waste. The costs of day-to-day and periodic maintenance and inspection (during which plants usually have to be taken off-line) are also included. Because investment costs are essentially fixed after construction, O&M costs represent a major opportunity for cost-reduction in an existing power plant. Fuel costs include costs related to the fuel cycle, including the costs of purchasing, converting and enriching uranium, fuel fabrication, spent fuel conditioning, reprocessing, disposal of the spent fuel or the high-level waste resulting from reprocessing and transport. Fuel costs make up only about 20% of the costs of nuclear-generated electricity, which is therefore relatively insensitive to fuel price fluctuations – in contrast to the position of fossil fuels. Although generating costs are country-specific, Figure 7.2 shows the relative importance of the components in the cost of nuclear generation of electricity. Long-term financial risks and liabilities A decision to build or to continue to operate a nuclear power plant represents a greater commercial risk than is normally associated with alternative energy sources, for several reasons. The long planning timescale and operational life provides greater potential for long-term changes in the market to impact revenues negatively or positively. The high fixed-cost element, due largely to the high investment costs, produces greater vulnerability to short-term fluctuations in market conditions. The strong regulatory framework reduces operational flexibility and introduces the possibility of changes in regulatory requirements that could impact adversely on costs (and historically have done so). Uncertainties associated with the costs of decommissioning and long-lived waste disposal, including the time periods involved. Whereas non-nuclear plants can trade or sell much of their cost base under negative economic conditions, this is in practice largely Although decommissioning costs and the costs of managing its associated waste are high, they are a relatively small component of total life-cycle costs, not least because the long time periods involved produce considerable discounting. Uncertainties in the accuracy of predicted future costs are possible given the long service lives of reactors and the potential for changing and usually strengthening regulatory requirements. Therefore, allowances for uncertainty are made a part of the provisions to cover decommissioning costs. If these costs are provided for based on projected income over the expected life of a plant, there is a risk of shortfall should economic conditions force early closure, or should the plant produce revenues below projected levels. In practice, however, these funds have been collected over projected lifetimes considerably shorter than those actually achieved. The potential also exists for advances in the relevant technologies to reduce costs below those envisaged 3 gives a comparison of the representative generating costs of electricity from nuclear and some fossil fuel sources. Compared with nuclear energy, natural gas-fired plants are characterised by low capital investment costs and significant fuel costs. Coal-fired plants are characterised by mid-range investment and fuel costs. In general, fuel costs represent a relatively large proportion of fossil-fuel-based generating costs that are, as a result, sensitive to fuel price variations. Renewable sources of energy, e.g. wind and hydropower, are similar to nuclear power in having high investment and low production costs per unit of power produced. Existing plants Given the relatively low cost of nuclear fuel, the recent advances in improving efficiency, and the fact that in many cases original investment costs are now substantially amortised, existing nuclear power plants have mainly proved to be competitive worldwide. Data from the European Commission on electricity production costs (investment, O&M and fuel costs included) show nuclear energy to be competitive even accounting for its large investment costs he outlook for existing plants on economic grounds is therefore one of continuing use of these facilities, particularly as the costs for lifetime extension or capacity upgrade are typically much lower than those for building new plant. Nuclear energy in deregulated markets An OECD/NEA study on Nuclear Power in Competitive Electricity Markets, published in 2000, found that nuclear power plants in Finland, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, the United States and the United Kingdom had been competitive in their respective deregulated markets. Generally, the response to market deregulation had been an improvement in operating efficiency and profitability. The pressure to manage a plant properly to meet stringent nuclear safety regulations appears to provide a sound basis for competitive performance. New plants The 1998 study on Projected Costs of Generating Electricity compares the levelized costs of electricity for various fuel types. The results showed that the attractiveness of building new plants is dependent on country-specific factors including the prevailing discount rate. For example, according to the study, nuclear power is cheapest in 5 of 12 countries at a 5% per year rate while at 10% per year it is cheapest in none. The relatively large investment cost for new nuclear plants is a main factor. To make construction of new plants commercially more attractive under competitive conditions, investment costs must be reduced. New more cost effective designs, improved construction methods, standardisation and series construction and multiple unit construction are all means to reduce the investment costs of nuclear power plants. Improvement is possible. For example, in Japan during the 1990s, use of a standardised advanced design together with duplication of construction on a single site enabled the construction of new plants to be completed in under 6 years as compared with a previous range of 7-10 years, the construction of two advanced boiling water reactors (ABWR) at Kashiwazaki-Kariwa having been accomplished (from start to commercialisation) in 62 and 65 months. However, the high levels of financial commitment and risk in a competitive market can make it difficult for the private sector alone to finance new nuclear power plants, even given the potential time and cost savings. Historically, the exploitation of nuclear energy on a highly innovative basis has been driven by public-private sector relationships. The question now is whether this relationship can or should exist under deregulated conditions. A difference between nuclear energy and other forms of electricity production is that nuclear energy bears some costs that are not included in (are external to) the costs of other sources of electricity. Some of the costs associated with nuclear electricity generation included in the prices at which the resulting electricity is sold on the open market include radioactive waste management and disposal. Fossil fuel energy bears Construction of units 6 and 7 at the Kashiwazaki-Kariwa nuclear power station in Japan was accomplished in under six years. 62 External costs are costs that are imposed on society and the environment that are not accounted for in the cost to producers and consumers of energy, and omitted when calculating the market price. 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 22/05/03 14:06 Page 62 certain costs for reducing its emissions to air and water, as does nuclear, but a considerable part of the waste is disposed of to the atmosphere, imposing costs on the community that are not reflected in the price of its electricity. Table 7.2 represents the outcome of a major study by the European Commission on the external costs of electricity production by fuel source, including not only the costs of waste deposition but also the impacts on public health, together with certain other detriments whose costs are generally borne by society rather than the consumer. The economic competitiveness of nuclear power might be dramatically shifted if the external costs of fossil fuel generation were to be internalised. For example, if the external costs for carbon emissions alone were internalised through the imposition of a “carbon tax”, the effect on levelized generation costs would be significant (see Figure 7.4). Unless there is a steep reduction in nuclear energy capital costs, a significant and sustained rise in fossil fuel costs or political decisions to internalise some of the external costs associated with fossil fuels, private sector investment in new nuclear power plants may be lacking. Until then, decisions to build new nuclear power plants are likely to be significantly influenced by public policy factors, such as security of supply. Whether and how these governmental concerns may be addressed in competitive markets is an open question and outside the purview of the private sector Virtually all aspects of the use of nuclear energy are governed by a framework of national laws, frequently based on principles that have been agreed to internationally and which are often reflected in international agreements or other instruments. Those agreements and instruments that deal with non-proliferation, are a particularly important strand in these arrangements, responding to widely held public concerns regarding the spread of nuclear weapons. The Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty of 1968 is the fundamental legal basis for the international nuclear non-proliferation regime This chapter does not attempt to deal comprehensively with the extensive web of agreements, conventions, laws, regulations, standards and institutions that govern nuclear matters. Rather, it concentrates on two particularly important aspects of nuclear energy use – its legal framework and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. International nuclear law Responsible regulation of nuclear energy has always been indispensable for public confidence in its exploitation. Achieving that confidence requires the existence of a comprehensive and effective legal framework whose goal is the protection of the health, safety and security of the public and the integrity of the natural environment. Public confidence also requires trust in the involved institutions, both in the regulator and the regulated. This, in turn, requires among other things transparency and pro-active communication. An effective legal framework depends on strong requirements, as well as enforcement measures to ensure compliance with those requirements. At the same time, the framework needs to be flexible enough to keep pace with changes in technology and public concerns. Finally, because the consequences of nuclear energy’s use may not be confined within national borders, the framework should be international in character. National requirements All OECD countries using nuclear energy have established (1) general legislative requirements for the conduct of civil nuclear activities and (2) a public authority empowered to enforce compliance with these requirements. Most countries have established a mandatory licensing system, a form of regulation under which specific activities can only be lawfully carried out in accordance with terms and conditions specified in a licence issued by a public authority. In the vast majority of cases, compliance is verified through systematic inspection by the licensing authority, and by reporting requirements imposed on the licensee. Non-compliance with license conditions can result in the suspension or revocation of the license, the imposition of fines, or even imprisonment of the licensee or other responsible entity, depending on the severity of the violation. With the rapid development of nuclear science and technology over the past decades, governments have had to ensure that legislative requirements kept pace with the utilisation of new technologies and with new uses for existing technologies. In so doing, national legislation has steadily extended its scope with the intention of protecting the public and the environment from the risks associated with these new developments. As a result, today’s national legislative requirements cover an extremely wide range of activities, including Most OECD countries have adopted special liability and compensation legislation to ensure that those who suffer damage as a result of a nuclear accident have recourse to adequate compensation. These special regimes are unique, deviating as they do from the normal legal principles that determine liability for damages resulting from a hazardous activity. Under these regimes, the operator of a nuclear installation3 is both strictly and exclusively liable for nuclear damage suffered by third parties as a result of a nuclear accident occurring at its installation or involving nuclear substances coming from that installation. However, a limit is usually placed upon the amount of that liability as well as upon the time within which claims for damages must be brought. Within the OECD, the operator of a nuclear installation is required to maintain financial security covering the amount of its liability to ensure that funds will be available to compensate the damage suffered. Although this financial security may be obtained through a variety of means, e.g. a bank guarantee, a pledge of assets, a State guarantee or through a form of State insurance, in practice, private insurance is the most common form of financial security. Given the risks involved and the large amounts of coverage required, it is impossible for individual insurance companies to insure this risk on their own. As a result, within each country private nuclear insurance is provided by a “pool”, a group of insurance companies who have joined together on a co-insurance basis.4 Since their creation in the mid-1950s, the capacity of these pools has increased many times over – not only because more companies join but because with increasing experience, they are able to assume more risk. Nevertheless, even with this pooling of resources, their total financial capacity is still usually less than the amount of financial security required of the operator of a nuclear power plant. Consequently, the national pools work with other national pools to obtain coverage for the balance. Generally, the sponsoring national pool commits itself to provide the full amount of insure It is acknowledged that the operator liability amounts may not be sufficient to cover the consequences of a catastrophic nuclear accident. Therefore, supplementing these financial security requirements, most OECD member countries have mechanisms or policies in place to provide additional financial assistance or compensation out of public funds in the event that the operator’s financial security is not adequate to compensate for the damages incurred. Specific measures and amounts vary from country to country. In addition to these national compensation regimes, many countries are signatory or party to one or another of the several international conventions that establish liability and compensation regimes to manage the complicated process of claiming compensation for a nuclear accident with transnational effects. These conventions influence to the policyholder and then reinsures5 most of that amount through re-insurance contracts with another pool Both the Paris and Brussels Supplementary Conventions are currently in the process of revision. Once these revisions come into force, the liability limits imposed upon Paris Convention parties cannot be set at less than EUR 700 million, while the total amount of compensation to be made available under the combined Paris-Brussels regime will increase to a maximum of EUR 1.5 billion. A summary of the international liability and compensation conventions to which OECD member countries are party is given in Table 8.1. The table indicates the liability amounts imposed on nuclear operators under national legislation, which may differ from the amounts applicable under the conventions that the State is party to. Where the limits differ the higher amount is applicable. Nuclear installation operators must maintain financial security equal to the liability amount. Some countries, though, have imposed very high or even unlimited amounts of liability. In these cases, lower financial security limits have been established in order to permit the operators to obtain insurance and are indicated in the table. As can be seen, many countries that generate significant amounts of nuclear power are not party to these conventions, e.g. Canada, China, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation, Switzerland and the United States, although most of them have adopted identical principles in their national legislation. As in the past, nuclear law will continue to evolve at both the national and international levels. This evolution will reflect not only the need to properly manage scientific and technological developments in the nuclear field, but also the need to ensure that maximum benefits are derived from the peaceful use of nuclear energy while protecting public health and safety, and the environment Non-proliferation The incredible destructive potential of nuclear weapons has driven the international community to prevent their proliferation, or to “keep the genie in the bottle”. Yet, the peaceful uses of nuclear energy are seen to provide much benefit. Because a good deal of knowledge relevant to nuclear weapons is intrinsically acquired in the course of the preparation for and actual use of nuclear energy and/or nuclear research facilities, preventing weapons proliferation while allowing civil nuclear development to go on is a difficult task. Consequently, the risk of weapons proliferation will remain an issue for nuclear energy as long as the public has concerns that the link between civilian and military use of nuclear energy cannot be effectively and permanently cut. Obtaining nuclear weapons is a complex undertaking requiring not just specialised fissile material, but also the necessary knowledge and technology to be able to design, build, handle and deliver them. Physical testing of a nuclear weapon may also be sought to ensure its reliability and effectiveness. 70 The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) founded in 1957, is an independent, intergovernmental organisation in the United Nations family that serves as a forum for scientific and technical co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear technology. Key aspects of its responsibilities include developing internationally accepted nuclear safety standards and verifying that States use nuclear materials and facilities only for peaceful purposes. As of May 2003, 136 States were members of the IAEA. Physical security IAEA inspections Comprehensive test ban Technology export controls Material control and accounting NONPROLIFERATION Figure 8.1: The elements of non-proliferation 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 22/05/03 14:07 Page 70 Beginning in 1946, the international community targeted each of these “essentials” with the object of preventing access to the materials and critical technologies, preventing testing and also seeking to control access to the technologies needed to deliver a weapon (see Figure 8.1). These efforts culminated in a series of treaties, notably the Treaty on Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), which continue to form the basis of all efforts to prevent proliferation. The NPT divides the world into two groups – States that had nuclear weapons when the Treaty came into place, or the “Nuclear Weapons States” which included China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States; and the remainder of the signatories called the “Non-nuclear Weapons States”. As of the beginning of 2003 there were 188 signatories of the treaty the most recent being Cuba, which acceded to the treaty in November 2002. Each Nuclear Weapons State pledged not to transfer nuclear weapons, not to assist any Non-nuclear Weapons State to develop nuclear weapons and to work to achieve nuclear disarmament. India, Israel and Pakistan have so far refused to sign the NPT. Controls on nuclear materials IAEA safeguards are the key means of detecting and deterring the diversion of nuclear material by a State. All Non-nuclear Weapons States party to the NPT must agree to the application of IAEA safeguards to all of their nuclear material. Such comprehensive or full-scope safeguards agreements are intended to provide confidence that a Non-nuclear Weapons State is complying with its commitment not to manufacture nuclear weapons. Furthermore, while not obligated to do so, each of the Nuclear Weapons States has concluded safeguards agreements (so-called voluntary offers) that permit the IAEA to verify some or all of its civil nuclear activities. IAEA safeguards are also applied in States that have not signed the NPT (Cuba, India, Israel and Pakistan), but only on selected facilities when required by the suppliers of the facilities or the nuclear material involved. In 1997, an additional safeguards protocol, which includes measures to improve the capability to detect possibly undeclared nuclear activities, was agreed and is now in the ratification process. The essence of safeguards is a State declaration about its nuclear material, facilities and activities coupled with IAEA inspection or access to verify this information. Inspections are usually conducted on a random, yet pre-announced basis at least annually. In the most sensitive facilities physical inspections may even be performed continuously. IAEA inspection activities can include verification that the design of nuclear facilities is as declared, examination of operating records, measurement and sampling of the nuclear material itself, and the use of surveillance equipment and sealing devices to maintain knowledge of the material. The additional safeguards protocol requires that States provide even more wide-ranging information on their nuclear activities (extending to those that do not necessarily involve nuclear material) and allow the IAEA access to all the locations concerned on a surprise or challenge basis. IAEA safeguards are complemented by other regional arrangements such as the Euratom safeguards program and the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials. In addition, national security measures are used to prevent theft or diversion of nuclear materials and technologies as well as to prevent sabotage. These security measures consist largely of physical security controls such as secure facilities, armed guards, special locks and access codes and cameras, but include also organisational controls such as limiting access to sensitive information and the security clearance of individuals. Controls on key technologies Certain key materials and technologies are subject to very strict international export controls because it is considered very important to ensure that they are not diverted to military purposes. The Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) has a series of nuclear suppliers guidelines governing the transfer of key materials and technologies. The Guidelines for Nuclear Transfers concern the transfer of nuclear material, equipment, technology, components and facilities defined in an export trigger list. Members of the NSG have agreed not to transfer trigger list items to a Non-nuclear Weapons State that does not have a full-scope safeguards agreement with the IAEA. The NSG also has guidelines relating to the transfer of certain “dual-use” items or technologies that can have 71 The Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) is a group of nuclear supplier countries, 39 as of October 2002, which work together to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. These countries pursue the aims of the NSG through adherence to consensus guidelines concerning nuclear and nuclear-related exports and through the exchange of information. “Not achieving a nuclear test ban would have to be classed as the greatest disappointment of any administration, of any decade, of any time and of any party.” Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1961. 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 22/05/03 14:07 Page 71 72 non-nuclear use in addition to a nuclear-related use, such as high-speed computers. Similarly, most parties to the NPT already co-operate to control missile technologies that can deliver nuclear weapons through the Missile Technology Control Regime. Actions are also being taken to stop smuggling of nuclear materials, most prominently the G-8 illicit trafficking program and its IAEA follow-up. Less formally, many governments share information on suspected illegal exports and imports of nuclear technology and materials and may well apply sanctions in the case of suspected or actual actions of proliferation. Controls on testing of nuclear weapons Negotiations for a “comprehensive test ban” were initiated in January 1994 and the CTBT was concluded in September 1996, although it will not enter into force until all of the 44 States with nuclear power or research reactors have ratified it. It prohibits all nuclear explosions, either for military or civilian purposes. Its signatories (numbering 166 countries by October 2002) agree to prohibit or prevent nuclear explosions at any place within their jurisdiction or control, and not to encourage in any way participation in any nuclear explosion. The treaty establishes a comprehensive verification regime including the conduct of on-site inspections, provisions for consultation and clarification, and mutual confidence-building measures. Nuclear terrorism Recent events have renewed concerns about the use of radioactive or nuclear materials for terrorist purposes. The potential to use conventional explosives to disperse radioactive material, a so-called “dirty bomb”, reinforces the importance of national and international controls of these materials. For example, the IAEA is working to establish an international framework to improve the security of radioactive sources. So far, national and international controls on nuclear materials, testing and key technologies have succeeded in slowing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The challenges posed by India, Iran, North Korea and Pakistan are proving that continued efforts and vigilance are needed to ensure that the genie gets no further out of the bottle. Energy is an important component of any policy for sustainable development because it is vital to human activity and economic growth. The fact that current technologies for providing energy are now increasingly viewed as unsustainable provides both opportunity and challenge. The extent to which nuclear energy can be shown to be sustainable will to a significant extent determine its place in the energy supply spectrum. The sustainability of any development is customarily discussed under three dimensions – economic, environmental and social Oil and gas have a fairly limited geographical availability, with Middle Eastern countries and the Russian Federation controlling over 70% of world crude oil reserves and about two-thirds of natural gas reserves. Quite aside from the political instability that has sometimes characterised the supplier regions, the long supply routes to major markets are also vulnerable to disruption by political action. Conversely, OECD countries produce almost 55% of the world’s uranium, and have 40% of the known reserves, as compared with about 7% of oil, 12% of gas and 40% of coal reserves. OECD countries are moreover self-sufficient in the essential services that turn natural uranium into finished nuclear fuels (see Chapter 3). Unlike fossil fuels, nuclear fuel and fuel feedstock are compact and easy to stockpile; large inventories can be kept at comparatively low cost. About 25 tons of fuel assemblies will provide a year’s fuel for a 1 GWe current generation pressurised water reactor. A coal-fired plant of similar output would require 3 million tons of fuel, i.e. more than one hundred thousand times as much. As a nation’s dependency on foreign sources for its energy increases, so do the costs and economic consequences of any disruption. Any energy source that reduces dependence on external fuel sources can be said to enhance the security of energy 74 Social Economic Environmental Direct cost savings Diversity and security of supply Balance of payments Price stability Technical infrastructure and employment Spin-offs Social concerns The risks from NPPs Resource availability Direct environment impact Waste longevity Figure 9.2: Elements of sustainable development applicable to nuclear energy Sustainable development – development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. Brundtland Commission, 1987. Worldwide, 2 billion people are without access to electricity and an equal number continue to use traditional solid fuels for cooking. World Energy Assessment, United Nations Development Program, 2000. 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 22/05/03 14:10 Page 74 supplies and ultimately the security of the nation. Security has always been one of the main aims of energy policy in all OECD countries. Balance of payments Nuclear energy can be seen to have two potential positive influences on the balance of trade, assuming its costs are fairly competitive. First, importing relatively small amounts of low cost uranium would be more attractive than importing relatively large amounts of high-cost coal, oil or gas. Second, the creation or extension of the high-technology infrastructure needed to support nuclear energy can assist technology export. Price stability Fuel costs are a major component in the price of fossil fuel electricity. Hence the tendency towards fluctuations in fossil fuel prices (see Figure 9.3) translates itself into variations in the price of electricity, especially in a competitive market. The low share of fuel costs and high share of fixed costs in the case of nuclear electricity generation have, by contrast, a potentially stabilising effect on electricity costs and prices. Generally, the availability and use of as wide a range as possible of alternative energy sources tends to reduce demand pressures on any one fuel source and so contributes potentially to macroeconomic stability overall. Environmental aspects The environmental sustainability of a particular material is usually discussed in terms of its availability, e.g. the adequacy of reserves, and its direct impacts on the environment. Resource availability Uranium is widely dispersed in the earth’s crust and in the oceans, being more abundant than silver. At the beginning of 2001, estimated conventional uranium resources (known and undiscovered) totalled above 16 million tons or nearly 250 years of supply at the prevailing rate of usage. There are, in addition, unconventional resources in which uranium exists at very low grades, or is recovered as a by-product. These amount to about a further 22 million tons that exist in phosphate deposits and up to 4 000 million tons of uranium contained in seawater. Research has hinted that it is possible to tap the vast seawater resources though, at present, only on a laboratory-scale. The cost of doing so is also estimated to be very high, approximately 5-10 times the current cost of conventionally mined uranium. In the long term however, the adequacy of natural uranium resources depends on the reactor technologies and fuel cycle strategies adopted. Reprocessing of spent fuel using current light water reactor technology could, in principle, reduce the demand for uranium by 10-15%. The introduction of fast reactors would further increase fuel efficiency; replacing all current thermal reactors with fast reactors and reprocessing fuel cycles would increase uranium resources by a factor of 50 (see Table 10.1). Other advanced techniques currently envisaged could employ thorium as a fuel feedstock rather than uranium, thereby further expanding nuclear fuel resources. India, in particular, with large thorium reserves, is working to implement a thorium fuel cycle. In essence, nuclear energy cannot be considered to be resource-limited. Direct environmental impact Nuclear power is one of the few energy sources that emit virtually no air-polluting or greenhouse gases. The entire nuclear fuel cycle including mining of ore and the construction of power plants has been estimated to emit between 2.5 and 6 grams of carbon equivalent per kWh of energy produced. This is roughly equal to the estimated releases from the use of renewable sources (wind, hydro and solar power) and about 20-75 times less than the emissions from natural gas power sources, the cleanest fossil fuel available (see Figure 9.4). Nuclear power is thus one of the prime means available for limiting the emission of carbon into the environment. In OECD countries alone nuclear power plants avoid some 1 200 million tons of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions annually. Assuming that all nuclear power plants in the world were replaced by modern fossil-fuelled power plants, CO2 emissions from the world energy sector would rise by some 8% Nuclear power avoids the emission of local air polluting gases and particulates such as the sulphur and nitrogen oxides that have been linked to acid rain and respiratory diseases. The quantity of solid waste generated per unit of electricity is much lower for nuclear than for any fossil fuel source. It is essentially equivalent to that of renewable energy sources such as solar energy (see Figure 9.5). However, for nuclear power to make a very large contribution to precluding undue global warming, a large expansion in nuclear generating capacity would be necessary. At present, nuclear power is applied only in the production of electricity, one sector of energy use. Under current estimates, even if installed nuclear power capacity were to increase by a factor of 10 by 2100, its proportion of primary energy use would rise from the current 7% to no more than 25%, thereby avoiding some 15% of the expected cumulative carbon emission during the period. However, if this expansion in nuclear capacity were to take place on the basis of current technology, there would be a considerable addition to the accumulated volume (and also the activity) of radioactive waste. Nuclear energy is one of the options that could contribute to meeting the projected increases in the world’s energy demand, essentially without adding to carbon emissions. But, to be effective and acceptable at this level, advanced reactor technologies and recycling fuel strategies would be required. In essence, as the century unfolds, the current fleet of thermal, light water reactors would need to be replaced by advanced technologies, such as fast-breeder reactors with fuel recycling. Such a change would require considerable investment, though not one likely to exceed the investment demands of other strategies for meeting increased energy demand while limiting global warming. Waste longevity High-level waste, though small in volume, remains radioactive for very long periods. Deep geological repositories have been investigated for several decades and the expert judgement is that there are no technical barriers to their construction to very high standards of integrity. Although there has been recent progress in Finland and the United States, no repository is yet operational. So the disposal of high-level waste remains, at present, a challenge to the sustainable development of nuclear energy. Research and development on advanced fuel cycles and for the treatment of waste promise to reduce the volume of waste requiring isolation and the time this waste must remain isolated. Yet, the results of these investigations will not likely be available for several decades. Social aspects Technical infrastructure and employment It is people who create and maintain any technology. In this respect nuclear energy has certain special characteristics, based as it is on major 20th century scientific and technological developments. Much of the high cost of nuclear facilities is embodied in science and technology, essential for their continued safety and future development. The nuclear industry also employs a high proportion of skilled, graduate staff relative to most other major energy and manufacturing industries. They are important, though vulnerable, social capital as well as a base for continuous improvement in performance within the industry (and in certain respects beyond it). The sustainability of nuclear power depends upon the complex and expensive infrastructure that underlies this social capital, which, if it were lost, might be hard to replace either cheaply or quickly. Spin-offs Maintaining and improving the technical and intellectual infrastructure to support nuclear energy provides numerous spin-off benefits for a society. As with other very advanced technologies, nuclear energy has historically played a very important part in the development of new materials, techniques and skills, which have spun off into other sectors, e.g. medicine, manufacturing, public health and agriculture, with consequent economic benefit. Social concerns All energy technologies tend to create social concern, even conflict. In the case of nuclear energy, concern has focused on questions of safety, proliferation and waste disposal. Coal has its own profound history of conflict and social division, as, on an international scale, has oil. The exploitation even of renewable energies has come under recent scrutiny and opposition arising from their visual intrusiveness and large-scale demands on land area. Large hydro projects have raised opposition on a global scale because of the social and environmental impacts of the massive inundations involved. The risks from nuclear power plants As with any other major industrial installation, and despite all precautions, nuclear power plants present risks to workers, to people living in the immediate vicinity, and, in the case of a very severe accident such as that at Chernobyl, to people living very far away. Usually, these risks are analysed in terms of radiological consequences as a result of (1) normal operation and (2) from accidents. Given the highly qualified personnel, sound operational practices, and strict regulatory oversight, nuclear energy from an industrial safety viewpoint, is relatively safe. For example, data from the United States for 2000 reveals an accident rate at nuclear power plants of 0.26 accidents per 200 000 worker-hours compared with a countrywide workplace average of 3.0. Risks from normal operation Radiological risks from normal operation arise from the day-to-day discharges both to air and to water of radioactive material. Such discharges are strictly governed in all OECD countries by authorisations from the relevant regulatory authorities. They are also the subject of international understandings, such as the OSPAR Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic , of which the most recent Ministerial agreement, reached at Sintra, Portugal in 1998, called for the reduction of additional radioactive burdens from marine discharges, emissions and losses to be “close to zero” by 2020. In principle, discharges of this kind can affect the human food chain (via shellfish for example) and so represent a hazard to the public. Estimates can be made of the chances of people being adversely impacted by low-level discharges stemming from living near nuclear plants or eating very large quantities of seafood. Where such estimates have been made, they indicate a risk that is considerably less than one in 1 000 000 per annum to any of the people theoretically at risk. Risks from accidents The risks from accidents are much harder to estimate, partly because nuclear accidents of all kinds have been very rare, and partly because the consequences could vary over so wide a range. Studies have been conducted to estimate the chances of the protective barriers built into modern power plants failing in the course of an accident, causing radioactive releases of various hypothetical sizes. The calculations typically show that the chances of any such accident at a modern reactor, one that has been upgraded in keeping with the lessons of Three Mile Island and Chernobyl, are less than 1 in 100 000 per annum. Designs for reactors planned for future deployment have more explicitly considered severe accidents in their design and calculations indicate the likelihood of a severe accident being even lower, on the order of 1 in 1000 000 per annum. In considering these figures, however, it needs to be borne in mind that the effects of a major nuclear accident may have considerable impacts including the deaths of individuals (which may occur decades after the accident), the loss of use of land for living or farming, and the loss of large amounts of electricity generating capacity, all of which would have serious consequences for society. In considering the potential risks of nuclear energy it is necessary to regard it in the context of meeting increasing societal energy demands. Looking at the potential risks from different energy sources shows that the potential environmental and public health burdens from nuclear energy are smaller than those associated with fossil fuels (see Figure 9.6). Taking a wider view, one should also consider the more intangible risks such as placing undue reliance on fuels imported from distant countries that could cause significant economic disruption should those supplies be interrupted. Additionally, fossil energy sources, which are increasingly believed to contribute to global warming, could, in several centuries, have serious consequences such as parts of seaboard cities becoming uninhabitable. Nuclear installations of all kinds are among the numerous potential targets for terrorist activity. However, unlike many other industrial activities, nuclear power plants take active measures in response to this potential threat, though absolute security can never be guaranteed. It is very 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 22/05/03 14:10 Page 78 difficult to quantify or even describe risks of this kind, but nuclear power stations, because of their inherent robustness, built-in protection, security forces and generally remote locations, are comparatively unattractive and unrewarding targets for a terrorist attack. Ultimately, only individuals can judge the extent to which particular risks concern them. Comparative risk figures can therefore have only a limited significance, but they are nonetheless a way of putting matters into proportion, and of reminding ourselves that the world is a risky place, and that all the available means for electricity production carry risks. The social element in sustainable development can only be met by addressing public concerns and gaining public confidence. It will be important to enable the public to put the social, ethical and political issues raised by nuclear power into a perspective with the different, but not altogether dissimilar, issues raised by the alternative sources of electricity generation. Generally, when viewed by applying the three dimensions of sustainable development, nuclear energy can be seen to have potential to meet a significant part of the world’s future energy needs while meeting many of the objectives of sustainable development. The overall political trade-offs between the three dimensions of sustainability will differ from country to country, and will affect both the decisions taken and the means of addressing public concerns and securing public confidence. The future of nuclear energy depends on the interplay between four factors – growth in energy demand, cost-competitiveness with other fuel sources, environmental considerations, and questions of public attitude and perception. Depending on the satisfactory resolution of these factors and on technical advances, many new and enlarged applications of nuclear energy can be envisaged, including hydrogen production, seawater desalination and expanded production of isotopes for medical purposes. Much research is under way to develop these potential applications and to improve the performance of nuclear energy systems At the end of 2000, world nuclear generating capacity represented about 17% of the world’s electricity. Most of this capacity had, however, already been installed by 1990 (see Figure 1.1). Since then, though new plants continue to come online, there have also been withdrawals due to the ageing of existing plants, and very little net capacity has been added. Capacity forecasts by national governments suggest a fairly stable picture up to and perhaps beyond 2020, with projections of installed nuclear capacity ranging between 334 and 466 GWe, compared with 362 GWe at present. Figure 10.1 shows, however, the considerable regional variations implicit in these projections. In Western Europe at least, it will only be a matter of time before a gradual reduction in installed capacity begins to take place, based on present trends and despite the increasing longevity of the existing stock. The Far East, by contrast, is experiencing strong growth that is projected to continue, with China, the Republic of Korea and Japan all building multiple plants. Eastern Europe – particularly Russia and Ukraine – are experiencing strong growth, though planned retirements of older plants in other countries will offset these gains. The outlook in North America is uncertain with a significant re-evaluation of nuclear energy under way, the results of which remain unclear. For reasons discussed earlier in this book, the future course of nuclear energy depends on factors that are particularly hard to predict, including public attitudes. If the equation consisted only of economic factors with no change in current attitudes, nuclear energy’s characteristic high construction and low generating costs could lead, in a deregulated and highly competitive market, to a situation where existing plants are run profitably to exhaustion and not replaced. However, increasing world energy demand will continue to require decisions on building new power plants and this limiting scenario could, then, be shifted positively or negatively, by other factors such as Hydrogen production Hydrogen is already an important industrial commodity with an annual world consumption of some 45 million tons. Its uses are primarily in the production of chemicals, fertiliser and in oil refining, where demand for it is expected to increase significantly as high quality oil stocks diminish and cleaner fuels are mandated. Hydrogen also has a large potential as a “clean” fuel in its own right. A great deal of research is currently taking place on the possibility of hydrogen replacing carbon fuels used in motor vehicles – currently the fastest expanding component in world energy demand. If this were to prove successful, the demand for hydrogen would expand dramatically. However, its production currently involves the use of natural gas, itself a carbon-emitter. Before it can pass the “sustainability” test, and notwithstanding its inexhaustible availability, more economic methods for producing hydrogen directly from water without using carbon fuels are required. Nuclear energy could become an important source of “sustainable” hydrogen either through producing the necessary high-temperature heat, or through electricity. The NEA report on Nuclear Production of Hydrogen (2001) concluded that: Nuclear production of hydrogen holds the potential to significantly contribute to the global energy supply of the 21st century. Production of hydrogen through water cracking and through nuclear-assisted conversion of fossil feedstock is technically feasible and could provide energy in a way that would diminish global greenhouse gas production. Several types of high-temperature reactor could provide the near-1 000 °C temperatures necessary for the direct production of hydrogen, such as high-temperature gas reactors or molten metal reactors. Research and development into the use of nuclear energy to produce hydrogen is being conducted in a number of countries and through several international agencies, including the NEA and the IAEA, which are tracking and supporting this potentially important future role for nuclear energy. Seawater desalination Fresh water of the requisite quality is essential to life. In many parts of the world, particularly in 82 Where will future nuclear plants be built?  As of January 2003, there were 33 reactors under construction in 10 countries: India , China , Republic of Korea , Ukraine , Japan , Islamic Republic of Iran , Russia, Slovak Republic, Argentina  and Romania .  There are 26 reactors firmly committed or planned for construction in OECD countries, 24 of which are in Japan and the Republic of Korea. When its parliament voted on 24 May 2002, Finland became the first country in Western Europe in over ten years to authorise the construction of a new nuclear reactor. Though not yet formally committed, the United States government is working with utilities to plan for new nuclear power plants, with construction beginning before 2005. Conversely, Belgium and Germany have committed to phasing out nuclear power over the next several years., Asia and the Middle East, there is increasing difficulty in meeting growing demands from agriculture, industry, urban development and growing population. The purification of seawater requires considerable heat, and nuclear-powered desalination plants are already operating in Japan and the United States. These mainly provide pure water for onsite uses rather than large-scale consumption. They have nevertheless successfully demonstrated that, as the demand for desalination grows, nuclear energy is a viable alternative to fossil fuels as the heat source. Argentina, China, India, Morocco, Pakistan, the Republic of Korea, and the Russian Federation have shown interest in this possibility. Process and district heating One application of nuclear energy that has existed from the outset and has the potential to grow in future is to use reactor heat to produce hot water or steam for industrial or residential heating purposes – usually, but not necessarily, in conjunction with the generation of electricity. Significant experience in this use of nuclear energy has been gained in Bulgaria, Canada, China, Germany, Hungary, Japan, Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation, the Slovak Republic, Switzerland, Ukraine and the United States. About 1% of the heat generated in nuclear reactors worldwide is applied in this way, and the development of small or medium-sized reactors especially for heat production could stimulate further growth. This possibility is being pursued in China and the Russian Federation. Isotope production Both radioactive and stable isotopes are very widely used, particularly in medicine, industry, agriculture, food processing and research. In 2000, isotopes were produced by more than 70 research and power reactors in over 60 countries. In many applications, isotopes have no substitute and in most, they are more effective and cheaper than alternatives. So far they have principally been produced as by-products of research activity, but a number of purpose-built isotope production reactors are now planned or under construction. A brief look at representative uses will illustrate their importance and diversity. Medical applications Isotopes have been routinely used in medicine for over thirty years, and are now applied in over 30 million critical medical procedures annually worldwide. They are used extensively in the detection of tumours and a wide variety of other ailments (e.g. cardiological diseases) through diagnostic gamma-imaging cameras. The primary isotope for these purposes is reactor-produced technetium-99. In therapy, the implantation in the body of sealed radioactive sources (brachytherapy) has been used to treat cancers of the cervix, uterus, breasts, lung, pancreas, prostate and oesophagus. The important isotopes for this purpose are reactor-produced iodine (125I) and palladium (103 Pd). Agriculture and industry is a large user of isotopes, principally in instrumentation and process equipment. The applications include analytical and security instrumentation, pollution measurement, physical measurement, food irradiation and non-destructive testing. Food irradiation has been successfully applied to spices, fruit, grains, meat, fish and poultry-meat. Among others, the World Health Organisation, the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation and the US Food and Drug Administration have endorsed it; the number of countries allowing it as a means to improve the safety and nutritional value of food is increasing. Trends in isotope uses Trends in isotope uses are not easily defined as they vary from sector to sector as well as from region to region, with some isotopes declining in importance while others increase. In the medical field, as a whole, isotopes are increasingly used in an ever-widening range of applications. Trends vary, however, for each specific application. For example, remotely controlled cobalt therapy is projected to progressively decrease while the use of isotopes in brachytherapy is projected to sharply increase. The development of new applications, such as palliative care, create additional demand for isotopes already in use as well as demand for new isotopes. For industrial applications as a whole, the demand for isotopes is relatively stable. However, if food irradiation becomes widespread it would create a demand for large volumes of radioactive cobalt. Given that many of these isotopes are capable of being produced in accelerators, it is difficult to predict how changes in isotope demand will be reflected as a need for new reactor-based production capability Research and development Research and development (R&D), which has throughout its existence been central to all applications of nuclear energy, has been the cause of many important advances in human knowledge. Among many areas of R&D interest, three dominant themes are now apparent: advanced reactors and fuel cycles; advanced treatments for waste; and support for safe operation. Research is conducted by academics, governments (including regulatory authorities) and industries, either singly or in combination, and with a growing emphasis on international collaboration in nuclear R&D. Advanced reactors and fuel cycles Light water reactors (LWR) are now essentially mature technologies. Consequently, in the near term, new reactor designs under development represent an evolution of existing concepts, in order to improve safety, operational economy and flexibility. Several improved designs likely to be ready for commercial development by or before 2015 include Generation IV International Forum This effort was started at the end of 2000 as a collaboration of interested governments, industry and the research community in an attempt to develop and demonstrate one or more advanced nuclear systems that could be commercially deployed by 2030 (“fourth generation” nuclear systems). The objective is to make advances over existing systems in the areas of economy; safety and reliability; sustainability; and proliferation resistance and physical protection. At the beginning of 2003, the members of the group were Argentina, Brazil, Canada, France, Japan, the Republic of Korea, South Africa, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. In October 2002, six nuclear energy system concepts were selected to be the focus for collaborative R&D. The concepts include: a sodium cooled fast reactor, a very-high-temperature reactor, a supercritical-water-cooled reactor, a lead-cooled fast reactor, a gas-cooled fast reactor and a molten salt reactor. All but one of these concepts involve recycling spent nuclear fuel. International Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel Cycles (INPRO) This international collaboration, initiated and supported by the IAEA, was launched in 2001 with the stated objective of supporting the safe, sustainable, economic and proliferation-resistant use of nuclear technology to meet the global energy needs of the 21st century. At the beginning of 2002 the members of the initiative included the European Commission, Argentina, Canada, China, Germany, India, the Netherlands, the Russian Federation, Spain, Switzerland and Turkey. Advanced treatment of waste A fairly new approach that has the potential to change the nature of the wastes that will require geological disposal is partitioning and transmutation (P&T). This process involves the transmutation of long-lived radionuclides into shorter-lived ones through neutron capture or fission, thereby eliminating those parts of high level waste that contribute most to its heat generation and radioactivity. Partitioning and transmutation therefore has the potential to reduce the time that waste needs to be kept isolated from several thousand to several hundreds of years – i.e. to periods that are within human experience, thereby reducing the uncertainties associated with predicting repository performance. However, sufficient conversion of the longer-lived isotopes to achieve these aims would require many stages of P&T and a fully developed reprocessing fuel cycle. Therefore, solutions along these lines seem a long way off. The approaches to P&T that are being researched vary according to each country’s fuel cycle practices and policies, but are similar enough to encourage collaboration. The main lines of the research are advanced separation technologies, to better remove the fission products and transuranic elements from spent fuel, and the use of accelerator-driven and reactor systems for transmutation. Numerous countries including Belgium, China, France, Italy, Russia and the United States are investigating these research areas. Small-scale collaborative efforts currently involve France, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the United States and the European Commission. Nuclear safety R&D In addition to the R&D aimed at making advances in nuclear technologies, there have always been and continue to be both national and international programs to support the safe operation of nuclear power plants. At the international level, the NEA manages a number of research projects, for example the Halden Reactor Project in Norway. This project has been in operation for over 40 years and is supported by approximately 100 organisations in 20 countries. Research is conducted on, among other things, fuels and materials, the improvement of plant performance and operational safety. Other international R&D The European Union, through the European Commission and its Joint Research Centre (JRC), sponsors and conducts numerous research projects in support of its member states’ programs. Research related to nuclear energy is conducted at four of the seven JRC centres. Thus, the Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements (IRMM) at Geel, Belgium, conducts measurements of neutron interactions with materials, including high resolution cross-section measurements. The Institute for Transuranium Elements (ITU) at Karlsruhe, Germany, conducts research related to alpha-immunotherapy, basic actinide research, safety of nuclear fuel, spent fuel characterisation, and partitioning and transmutation. The Institute for Energy (IE) at Petten, the Netherlands, conducts research related to nuclear safety, development of new nuclear energy systems and nuclear medicine. Finally, the Institute for the Protection and Security of the Citizen (IPSC) at Ispra, Italy, conducts research related to non-proliferation and nuclear safeguards. The IAEA also sponsors other nuclear R&D through its Co-ordinated Research Program in nuclear energy, radioactive waste safety, waste technology and safeguards. Nuclear energy is a technically complex source of energy that remains unique among energy sources as a result of a number of factors. In relation to nuclear energy in its current form, it has been shown that:  Nuclear energy is a major source of energy in the world, producing about 17% of the world’s electricity. The large majority of reactors use ordinary water as coolant and moderator, uranium as fuel and a once-through fuel cycle. The disposal of low-level waste and intermediate-level waste is a mature practice, but the disposal of high-level waste is not yet carried out; public opposition is the main constraint although progress towards implementing solutions is beginning to be made.  Very high levels of safety are essential to nuclear energy deployment, though some degree of risk remains.  An effective system of radiological protection has been developed based on three principles: justification, optimisation and limitation. Existing power plants are generally economically competitive, even in deregulated markets, but decisions to build new power plants may depend on public policy factors. A framework of national laws and international agreements governs virtually all aspects of the use of nuclear energy, indicating larger governmental involvement than for other energy sources.  Nuclear energy has certain advantages over other energy sources: carbon-free and air-pollution-free generation of electricity as well as security of supply. Evolutionary and revolutionary advances in technology are being pursued to develop new applications of nuclear energy and to improve the performance of nuclear energy systems. In light of these characteristics, nuclear energy is at something of a crossroad at the beginning of the second nuclear century as it undergoes a thorough review by governments, the public and industry. Decision makers are faced with the difficulty of how to meet the continued growth in world energy demand while minimising the environmental impacts of energy production. They must do so while accounting for public attitudes, the cost and competitiveness of the various energy sources and public policy objectives such as security of supply and non-proliferation. How they resolve the tension between these sometimes conflicting factors will ultimately define the extent of nuclear energy’s use worldwide. How soon promising advances in the state of the art can influence these decisions will also play a significant role. If a case cannot be satisfactorily made that nuclear energy is economically competitive, safe and that there are acceptable solutions for its waste, then nuclear energy is likely to decline, at first slowly, in importance. Yet, if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the public that nuclear energy does address these concerns, it is likely that there will be strong new growth in nuclear power Radiation that originates in space and is generated through various processes, including the birth and death of stars. When cosmic radiation interacts with the nucleus of an atom it produces cosmogenic radionuclides with half-lives that range from thousands to millions of years. They can exist in the earth’s atmosphere, on the solid surface of the earth and can also be produced in meteorites and other extra-terrestrial materials, which then fall to earth. Examples include tritium (3H), hydrogen with two extra neutrons, which forms part of all water on earth (12.3-year half-life) and carbon-14 (5730-year half-life), which exist in every living thing. be used to make new reactor fuel. As practised today, only the recovered plutonium is recycled, to make mixed-oxide fuel (MOX). Because of the build up of plutonium isotopes that are unable to fission in the thermal neutron spectrum of a light water reactor and the build up of undesirable isotopes, especially curium, the plutonium can only be recycled two or three times before it must be managed as a waste similar to the once-through cycle. Using recycled fissile materials in a fast reactor eliminates this limitation. Control rods Control rods are made of materials which absorb neutrons, for example boron, silver, indium, cadmium and hafnium. They are introduced into the reactor to reduce the number of neutrons and thus stop the fission process when required, or during operation to regulate the level and spatial distribution of power in the reactor. Conversion The chemical process used to turn solid uranium oxide received from a uranium mill into volatile uranium hexafluoride, which is a gas at certain temperatures and pressures, and therefore suitable for the enrichment process. Coolant A coolant absorbs and removes the heat produced by nuclear fission and maintains the temperature of the fuel within acceptable limits. The absorbed heat can then be applied so as to drive electricity generating turbines. If water is used as the coolant, the steam it produces when heated can be transferred directly to the turbines; alternatively, it, or any other coolant, can be passed through a heat exchanger which will remove the heat and produce the necessary steam. Other possible coolants are gases like helium, or liquefied metals such as sodium or lead and bismuth. A coolant can also be a moderator; water is used in this dual way in most reactors. Cosmic Radiation that originates in space and is generated through various processes, including the birth and death of stars. When cosmic radiation interacts with the nucleus of an atom it produces cosmogenic radionuclides with half-lives that range from thousands to millions of years. They can exist in the earth’s atmosphere, on the solid surface of the earth and can also be produced in meteorites and other extra terrestrial materials, which then fall to earth. Examples include tritium (3H), hydrogen with two extra neutrons, which forms part of all water on earth (12.3-year half-life) and carbon-14 (5730-year half-life), which exist in every living thing. Criticality The state of a nuclear reactor when enough neutrons are created by fission to make up for those lost by leakage or absorption such that the number of neutrons produced in fission remains constant. Critical mass The amount of fissionable material needed to maintain a fission chain reaction for a given set of conditions, e.g. shape of the fissionable material, amount and type of moderator or reflector. D Decommissioning Administrative and technical actions taken to allow the removal of some or all of the regulatory controls from a nuclear installation. Decommissioning typically involves several stages: closeout, decontamination and dismantling, and demolition and site clearance. Defence in depth A design and operating philosophy used with regard to nuclear facilities that uses multiple layers of protection to prevent and mitigate the consequences of accidents. It includes the use of physical and administrative controls, physical barriers, redundant safety functions and emergency response measures. Depleted uranium having less than the natural occurring isotopic concentration of uranium-235 of about 0.711%. Depleted uranium is produced as a by-product of the enrichment process. Design basis accidents The range of conditions and events (e.g. rupture of piping, coolant pump failure) taken explicitly into account in the design of a nuclear facility such that the facility can withstand them without exceeding authorised safety limits. The ability to withstand design basis accidents presumes the functioning of engineered safety systems. Deterministic effects Deterministic effects are those effects that are sure to occur (e.g. measurable changes in blood) should a radiation exposure exceed the threshold for that effect. The magnitude of the effect is proportional to the exposure above the threshold. Deterministic safety approach The deterministic safety approach is a method of assessing the safety of a nuclear power plant using a defined set of initiating events, “design basis events”. The design basis events are chosen to encompass a range of realistic possible initiating events that could challenge the safety of the plant. Examples include loss-of-coolant accidents, control rod ejection (for a PWR), control rod drop (for a BWR) and steam line break. Engineering analysis is used to predict the response of the plant and its safety systems to the design basis events and to verify that this response remains within prescribed regulatory limits. Deuterium A stable isotope of hydrogen having one proton and one neutron in its nucleus compared with the one proton in the nucleus of ordinary hydrogen. Discount rate The discount rate is an important element in economic analysis and the suitability of an economic decision can change depending on the value of the discount rate. In simple terms, if money can earn interest at a percentage rate per year (r) in real terms, then EUR 10 today will grow to 10(1+r)t in t years time. Alternatively, an amount worth EUR 10 (t years in the future) can be discounted using the discount rate (d) such that it would be equivalent to EUR 10(1+d)-t today. Dry storage Following an initial cooling period in a water-filled pool, spent fuel can be loaded into large, shielded casks in which natural air circulation maintains it at the required temperatures. E Electron volt A unit of energy often used in the nuclear sciences. It represents a very small amount of energy that is equal to the amount of energy an electron would gain from the electric potential of one volt. Being so small it is often expressed in terms of mega-electron volts (MeV), that is a million (1x106 electron volts). An electron volt is equivalent to 1.602 x 10-19 joules. Energy availability factor The energy availability factor is a measure of operational performance of a nuclear reactor and is the percentage of the energy delivered to the electricity grid compared with the maximum energy generation that a reactor is capable of supplying. Enriched uranium in which the isotopic concentration of uranium-235 has been increased above the naturally occurring level of 0.711%. 93 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 23/05/03 19:03 Page 93 Enrichment The physical process of increasing the isotopic concentration of uranium-235 above the level found in natural uranium. Two processes are commercially used, gaseous diffusion and gas centrifugation. Estimated additional resources – category I (EAR-I) Uranium that is inferred to occur, based on direct geological evidence, in extensions of well-explored deposits, or in deposits in which geological continuity has been established but where specific data, including measurements of the deposits, and knowledge of the deposits’ characteristics are considered to be inadequate to classify the resource as a “reasonably assured resource” (RAR). Estimates of tonnage, grade and cost of further delineation and recovery are based on such sampling as is available and on knowledge of the deposit characteristics as determined in the best-known parts of the deposit or in similar deposits. Estimated additional resources – category II (EAR-II) Uranium that is expected to occur in deposits for which the evidence is mainly indirect and which are believed to exist in well-defined geological trends or areas of mineralisation with known deposits. Estimates of tonnage, grade and cost of discovery, delineation and recovery are based primarily on knowledge of deposit characteristics in known deposits within the respective trends or areas and on such sampling, geological, geophysical or geochemical evidence as may be available. Less reliance can be placed on the estimates in this category than on those for EAR-I. External costs External costs are costs that are imposed on society and the environment that are not accounted for in the cost to producers and consumers of energy and omitted when calculating the market price. In energy production these are typically waste disposal, environmental impact or population health effects. F Fast neutrons Fast neutrons are defined as those with a high kinetic energy above about 0.1 eV but typically less than 1 000 000 eV (1 MeV). Fast neutrons can cause fission in fissile materials, but the probabilities are less than that for thermal neutrons. However, the number of isotopes that can fission increase as the energy of the neutron increases. Fertile materials A fertile material in one that is capable of becoming fissile through the capture of a neutron(s), possibly followed by radioactive decay. Important examples are uranium-238, which can transform into fissile plutonium-239, and thorium-232, which can transform into fissile uranium-233. Fissile materials A fissile material is a material that is capable of fission after the capture of a thermal (slow) neutron. In practice, the most important fissile materials are uranium-233, uranium-235 and plutonium-239. Fission The process through which an atomic nucleus splits into two or more fragments accompanied by the release of neutrons and significant amounts of energy. It is possible for a heavy nucleus to spontaneously fission though it is usually due to the nucleus absorbing a neutron. Fissionable materials A fissionable material is a material that is capable of undergoing fission, normally differentiated from fissile in that it will fission if it captures a fast neutron. An example of a fissionable material is uranium-238. Fission products When a nucleus undergoes fission, it splits into two fragments, releases neutrons and a great deal of energy. The fragments are called fission products, which may be stable or unstable, i.e. radioactive. 94 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 23/05/03 19:03 Page 94 Important fission product isotopes (in terms of their relative abundance and high radioactivity) are bromine, caesium, iodine, krypton, rubidium, strontium and xenon. They and their decay products form a significant component of nuclear waste. Fuel That part of the reactor that contains the fissionable material. Most reactors use uranium dioxide as their fuel. Most fuel for commercial reactors contains 2-5% uranium-235 (235U) compared with the 0.711% found in nature; they are said to be enriched in 235U. The remainder of the fuel, typically uranium-238 (238U), can fission only when hit by fast neutrons; but when neutron capture occurs, it decays and gradually transforms into plutonium-239 (239Pu). This fissile material is able to fission under the impact of thermal or fast neutrons, and its contribution to the energy output of the fuel gradually grows until it represents almost 30% of the power that is generated. Typically, uranium dioxide powder is heated and pressed to produce dice-sized cylindrical pellets. These are loaded into hollow metal tubes (fuel rods) that are then bundled as fuel assemblies. Over 730 fuel assemblies, containing about 46 000 fuel rods would fuel a typical boiling water reactor. About 10% of reactors worldwide have been licensed to use mixed-oxide (MOX) fuel – a mixture of uranium dioxide and plutonium dioxide. The plutonium dioxide mainly results from the commercial recycling of spent fuel, though the Russian Federation and the United States are planning to use plutonium from surplus nuclear warheads. The production process for MOX is similar to that for uranium dioxide fuels. Other possible reactor fuels are thorium, which is a fertile material that produces fissile 233U after neutron absorption and transmutation; uranium salts which can be used in liquid metal reactors; and other forms of uranium like uranium nitrides or uranium carbides. Fuel cycle The series of steps involved in creating, using and disposing of fuel for nuclear reactors. It can include mining and milling of uranium, conversion, enrichment, fabrication of fuel elements, use in a reactor, reprocessing and waste disposal. The precise steps defining a fuel cycle are dependent on a number of technological, economic and social factors. Early in the nuclear age, it was anticipated that fast breeder reactors would become the dominant design and a plutonium-based fuel cycle would exist. Thus the processes to produce and manage the nuclear fuel would be cyclical in the sense that the fuel would be recycled indefinitely. The term survives as the nomenclature for the processes used to produce and manage nuclear fuel even though the “once-through” fuel cycle does not recycle at all and the current “closed” fuel cycle does so only partially. Fusion is a nuclear reaction where light nuclei combine to form more massive nuclei with the release of energy. This process takes place continuously in the universe. In the core of the sun, at temperatures of 10-15 million degrees celsius, hydrogen is converted to helium, providing the energy that sustains life on earth. G Gamma rays High-energy electromagnetic radiation, similar to X-rays, the difference being that they originate in the nucleus of an atom. Gray The SI unit of absorbed radiation dose equal to one joule per kilogram of absorbing medium. H Half-life The time required for one-half of the atoms of a radioactive isotope to decay. 95 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 23/05/03 19:03 Page 95 Heavy water that contains significantly more deuterium atoms than normal water. Deuterium is an isotope of hydrogen that has one neutron and one proton compared with the one proton of ordinary hydrogen. Heavy water is used as a coolant and moderator in pressurised heavy water reactors (PHWRs) because its properties allow natural uranium to be used as fuel. Heavy water makes up less than 1% of water in nature and so must be separated and concentrated in dedicated plants for use in nuclear reactors. Highly enriched uranium enriched to at least 20% uranium-235. High-level waste (HLW) Radioactive waste is normally classified into a small number of categories to facilitate regulation of handling, storage and disposal based on the concentration of radioactive material it contains and the time for which it remains radioactive. The definitions of categories differ from country to country. However, in general, HLW contains long-lived radionuclides with high activity, which may also produce heat. It typically is concentrated as part of the process of reprocessing and solidified using vitrification to produce a glass-like substance suitable for interim storage and ultimately, disposal. Spent nuclear fuel that will not be reprocessed is included in this category. Geological disposal is foreseen for this type of waste. I Intermediate-level waste (ILW) Radioactive waste is normally classified into a small number of categories to facilitate regulation of handling, storage and disposal based on the concentration of radioactive material it contains and the time for which it remains radioactive. The definitions of categories differ from country to country. However, in general, ILW needs specific shielding during handling and, depending on the specific content of long-lived radionuclides, it may need geological disposal or it may be suitable for surface or near-surface disposal. Ion exchange A chemical process that, in relation to nuclear energy, is often used in water purification or radioactive waste treatment. A waste solution containing ions (an atom or group of atoms with an electrical charge resulting from one or more electrons being added or removed) of waste is passed over an ion exchange medium where the waste ions are exchanged with acidic (H+) or basic (OH-) ions in the medium, thereby trapping the waste ions in the medium. Typically, the ion exchange medium is a granular resin. After a period of use the resin becomes saturated with waste ions and must be replaced. A saturated resin can either be recycled or disposed of. An ion exchange resin, in effect, concentrates the radioactive waste and thus the resins can become highly radioactive and be remotely handled. Ionising radiation When radiation, either particles or electromagnetic waves, has enough energy to remove the electrons of atoms with which it interacts from their orbits, causing the atoms to become charged, or ionised, it is called ionising radiation. The ions resulting from the interaction are capable of causing chemical changes damaging to human cells. Examples of ionising radiation include alpha particles, beta particles and gamma rays. If radiation, either particles or electromagnetic waves, has insufficient energy to ionise atoms, it is known as non-ionising radiation. Examples of non-ionising radiation include radio waves, light and microwaves. Isotope Different isotopes of an element have the same number of protons but different numbers of neutrons. For example, uranium-235 (235U) and uranium-238 (238U) are both isotopes of uranium with 235U having 143 neutrons and 238U, 146. 96 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 23/05/03 19:03 Page 96 J Justification In the context of the nuclear industry, no public or worker exposure is allowed unless it is the result of an activity that has been “justified”. Broadly, this means that risk incurred from the radiation exposure resulting from the activity is outweighed by the social benefit that the performance of the activity brings. The decision as to whether a particular activity is justified or not is principally a subjective value judgement, which uses as input scientific information regarding the absolute and relative values of the radiological risks involved. The decision regarding the justification of an activity will most likely be case-specific, and will be made by different levels of public official or public process, depending upon the situation and the national context. K Known conventional resources The most readily accessible uranium resources; resources that are known to exist and are inexpensive to exploit using conventional mining techniques are classed as known conventional resources. These resources are categorised into two sub-groups: reasonably assured resources (RAR) and estimated additional resources – category I (EAR-I). Known conventional resources are reported in terms of the amount of uranium recoverable considering mining and milling process losses and are typically reported in cost categories of resources recoverable at less than USD 40/kilogram of uranium (kgU), USD 40-80/kgU and USD 80-130/kgU. L Light water reactor A nuclear reactor type that is cooled and/or moderated by ordinary water, as opposed to heavy water. Limitation In the context of the nuclear industry, limitation is the process of assuring that planned, justified activities do not result in any individuals exceeding a pre-established regulatory level of exposure. The numerical level selected for the regulatory limit is a subjective value judgement that takes science and social judgement into account. The limit is fixed at a level above which regulatory authorities deem it to be socially justified to spend resources to reduce exposures. Linear no-threshold hypothesis There has been much scientific study of radiation exposures and their associated risks. However, at low exposure levels, biological science and the statistics of exposed populations have yet to conclusively identify whether there is or is not a risk. In the absence of scientific certainty as to the shape of the curve that relates the level of individual exposure to the probability of occurrence of a particular stochastic effect, it has been assumed that a linear curve, passing through zero, will not result in risks being underestimated. For this reason, it is standard practice to assume that any exposure, no matter how small, carries some risk, and to optimise radiological protection approaches accordingly. Low enriched uranium in which the isotopic concentration of uranium-235 has been increased above naturally occurring levels while remaining less than 20%. Typically, nuclear power reactors use low enriched uranium with 3-5% uranium-235. Low-level waste (LLW) Radioactive waste is normally classified into a small number of categories to facilitate regulation of handling, storage and disposal based on the concentration of radioactive material it contains and the time for which it remains radioactive. The definitions of categories differ from country to country. However, in general, LLW is a type of waste that does not need significant shielding for handling and, 97 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 23/05/03 19:03 Page 97 because of the absence of long-lived radionuclides, is suitable for surface or near-surface disposal. About 90% of the radioactive waste volume produced in the world each year is LLW. M Megawatt (MW) The international unit of power that is equal to 1x106 watts. A megawatt electric (MWe) refers to the electrical output from a generator. A megawatt thermal (MWth) refers to the heat output from a nuclear reactor. The difference is a measure of the efficiency of the power generation process. Typically, the heat output of a nuclear reactor is three times its electrical output, thus a reactor with a thermal output of 2 700 MW may produce about 900 MW of electricity. Milling The process through which mined uranium ore is chemically treated to extract and purify the uranium. It also reduces the volume of material to be transported and handled in fuel manufacture. Reflecting its colour and consistency, the solid product (U3O8) of milling is known as yellowcake. Mill tailings The remnant of a metal-bearing ore consisting of finely ground rock and process liquid after some or all of the metal, such as uranium, has been extracted. Mixed-oxide fuel (MOX) MOX is the abbreviation for mixed-oxide fuel, a fuel for nuclear power plants that consists of a mixture of depleted uranium oxide and plutonium oxide. Moderator A moderator slows neutrons down to the thermal energy range so as to increase their efficiency in causing fission. The moderator must be a light material that will allow the neutrons to slow down efficiently without there being a high probability of them being absorbed. Usually, ordinary water is used; an alternative in use is graphite, a form of carbon. N Natural uranium that has the same isotopic composition as found in nature, 99.2745% uranium-238 (238U), 0.711% 235U, and 0.0055% 234U. Neutron An elementary particle with no electric charge and a mass slightly greater than a proton found in the nucleus of all atoms except hydrogen-1. Nuclear reactor A device that uses the nuclear fission process to produce energy. Though there are many types of reactors, certain features are inherent to all, including fuel, coolant, moderator (unless the reactor uses fast neutrons) and control rods. Other common features include a reflector to conserve escaping neutrons, shielding to protect personnel from radiation exposure, instrumentation to measure and control the reactor, and devices to protect the reactor. Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) The Nuclear Suppliers Group is a group of nuclear supplier countries, 39 as of October 2002, which work together to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. These countries pursue the aims of the NSG through adherence to consensus guidelines concerning nuclear and nuclear-related exports and through the exchange of information. Nuclear Suppliers Guidelines The Nuclear Suppliers Guidelines are a set of principles and lists of materials, equipment and products that could be used for designing, manufacturing and testing nuclear weapons that have been 98 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 23/05/03 19:03 Page 98 99 developed by the Nuclear Suppliers Group. Two sets of guidelines have been developed: the Guidelines for the Export of Nuclear Material, Equipment and Technology and the Guidelines for Transfers of Nuclear-related Dual-use Equipment, Material and Related Technology. Principles governing the use of the guidelines are Suppliers should authorise transfers of identified items or related technology only upon formal governmental assurances from recipients explicitly excluding uses that would result in any nuclear explosive device. Suppliers should authorise transfers of identified items or related technology only when they are satisfied that the transfers would not contribute to the proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. Suppliers should not be satisfied with an assurance from recipients if they have information or evidence, which leads them to believe that there is a risk that a transfer will contribute to nuclear weapons proliferation. O Once-through fuel cycle A fuel cycle that does not recycle the spent fuel. Once removed from the reactor the spent fuel is conditioned and stored until a disposal repository becomes available. Optimisation In the context of radiation protection, optimisation is the process of assuring that the exposures of the public and/or workers resulting from the operation of a justified activity are as low as reasonably achievable, social and economic factors being considered. Both qualitative (e.g. stakeholder consensus discussions, common sense good work practice, best industrial practice) and quantitative (e.g. differential cost-benefit analysis, multi-attribute analysis) approaches are used to arrive at optimised solutions. P Partitioning and transmutation (P&T) Partitioning is the separation of undesirable long-lived radioactive elements such as minor actinides (e.g. americium-243) and fission products from spent fuel. Transmutation is the transformation of these undesirable elements into short-lived or stable elements using nuclear reactions. Together these processes would, at least partly, eliminate those parts of high-level waste that contribute most to its heat generation and long-lived radioactivity. P&T therefore has the potential to reduce the time that waste needs to be kept isolated from several thousand to several hundreds of years. Plasma A state of matter (others are solid, liquid and gas) where all the electrons have been stripped from atoms leaving only the nuclei. Pressurised water reactor (PWR) A nuclear reactor maintained under a high pressure to keep its coolant water from boiling at the high operating temperature. The heat generated by the reactor is transferred from the core to a large heat exchanger that heats water in a secondary circuit to produce the steam needed to generate electricity. Probabilistic safety assessment (PSA) A PSA is a type of safety analysis that uses probabilistic risk assessment techniques during both the design and operation of a nuclear power plant to analyse the overall risk. Considering an entire set of potential events with their respective probabilities and consequences, the overall risk of a nuclear incident or accident can be assessed. For a power plant this risk is given in terms of a core melt frequency or the frequency of a large radioactive release. For existing power plants, a value below about 1 x 10-4 per year for a core damage probability is generally accepted, while new designs should be even 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 23/05/03 19:03 Page 99 100 less than 1 x 10-5 per year. The current practice is that the computed results are generally viewed as targets rather than absolute values that would serve for regulatory acceptance or refusal. Proton An elementary nuclear particle with a positive electric charge located in the nucleus of an atom. R Radiation Energy travelling in the form of high-speed particles or electromagnetic waves. We encounter electromagnetic waves everywhere. They make up our visible light, radio and television waves, ultra violet (UV), and microwaves. These examples of electromagnetic waves do not cause ionisation of atoms because they do not carry enough energy to separate molecules or to remove electrons from atoms. “Ionising radiation” is radiation with enough energy so that it can, during an interaction with an atom, remove tightly bound electrons from their orbits, causing the atom to become charged or ionised. Examples are gamma rays and neutrons. Radioactivity The spontaneous change of an unstable atom, often resulting in the emission of radiation. This process is referred to as a transformation, a decay, or a disintegration of an atom. Radioactive atoms are often called radioactive isotopes or radionuclides. Reasonably assured resources (RAR) Uranium that occurs in known mineral deposits of delineated size, grade and configuration such that the quantities which could be recovered within the given production cost ranges with currently proven mining and processing technology can be specified. Estimates of tonnage and grade are based on specific sample data and measurements of the deposits and on knowledge of deposit characteristics. Reprocessing The process of treating used reactor fuel to recover the uranium and plutonium and to separate them from the fission products and other elements. In this way a larger percentage of the potential energy value of the uranium can be utilised and the volume of waste can be reduced. S Safeguards The methods used to verify that the “peaceful use” commitments of non-proliferation agreements are honoured. Safeguards involve a country defining (i.e. declaring) what its inventory of weapons-usable nuclear materials is and where it is located. Safeguards consist of the verification of a nuclear installation’s control of and accounting for weapons-usable nuclear materials within all the nuclear facilities that a signatory State has formally declared as subject to safeguards. Verification is performed using IAEA-installed monitoring instruments, some of which are sealed to prevent tampering. Physical inspection of nuclear installations on a random, yet pre-announced, basis is conducted at least annually to verify the operator’s accounts and to ensure that all installed instruments are performing satisfactorily and that security seals have not been tampered with. Since 1997, IAEA inspections can also be carried out on a surprise or challenge basis once a State has ratified an additional safeguards protocol. The intended result of all inspections is that by verifying the inventories of nuclear material declared by a signatory government, the IAEA can announce that all nuclear material is being used for peaceful purposes. Scram A term used to describe the sudden shutting down of a nuclear reactor. It was originally an acronym meaning “safety control rod axe man” used with the first operating reactor in the United States, the Chicago pile. 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 23/05/03 19:03 Page 100 101 Sievert (Sv) The international unit indicating the biological effects caused by an exposure to radiation. The biological effects of radiation exposure vary depending on the type of radiation involved. For example, 1 joule of beta or gamma radiation per kilogram of tissue has 1 Sv of biological effect; 1 joule/kg of alpha radiation has 20 Sv effect; and 1 joule/kg of neutron radiation will cause 10 Sv of biological effect. Speculative resources (SR) Uranium that is thought to exist, mostly on the basis of indirect evidence and geological extrapolations, in deposits discoverable using existing exploration techniques. The location of deposits envisaged in this category could generally be specified only as being somewhere within a given region or geological trend. As the term implies, the existence and size of such resources are speculative. Spent nuclear fuel (SNF) Fuel that has been irradiated in and then permanently removed from a nuclear reactor. Stochastic effects Stochastic effects are those effects (e.g. cancer or leukaemia) whose probability of occurring is proportional to the radiation exposure received. SWU An acronym for separative work unit that is the standard measure of enrichment services. This is a complex unit relating to the enrichment process that is a measure of the effort or energy required separating isotopes. The unit is a function of the amount of uranium fed into the process, the degree to which it is enriched, and the amount of uranium-235 in the waste stream. Typically, about 100 000-120 000 SWU is required to provide the enriched uranium needed to fuel a 1 000 MWe light water reactor for one year. T Terrestrial radiation that comes from the earth itself and is produced by the decay of primordial and cosmogenic radionuclides. Most terrestrial radiation ultimately comes from uranium and thorium, common elements found in the earth’s crust, as they decay gradually over millions of years eventually becoming lead, which is stable, does not decay and thus emits no radiation. The result is that the earth’s crust is naturally full of not only uranium and thorium but also their radioactive decay products, such that the earth itself emits radiation. Additionally, the air we breathe also emits radiation naturally since one of the members of the uranium decay chain is radon. Radon is a gas, and if it is “born” near the surface of the earth, it enters into the atmosphere. Technetium-99 A radioactive isotope of technetium, of which a particular form known as technetium-99m (99mTc) is extensively used in nuclear medicine for cancer diagnosis. Technetium-99m is normally formed from the radioactive decay of molybdenum-99 (99Mo) which is produced by irradiating highly enriched uranium foil in a reactor. One of the fission products formed from the fission of the uranium in the foil is 99Mo, which is then chemically separated for use as a generator of 99mTc. Thermal neutrons Thermal neutrons are those with a low kinetic energy, less than 0.1 electron volt (eV). Thermal neutrons have the greatest probability of causing fission in uranium-235 and plutonium-239. Torus A donut-shaped geometrical shape created by rotating a circle about a line. Fusion reactor research has focused on two types of containment of the plasma (fuel): magnetic and inertial. Magnetic containment can be spherical or torus-shaped. In a torus-type fusion reactor, torus-shaped magnetic fields are used to contain the plasma (fuel). 1-RefBook 20 May 2003 23/05/03 19:03 Page 101 102 Transmutation When a nucleus absorbs a neutron and changes the nucleus from one element into another. This process occurs in fission reactors and is the process by which some long-lived elements of radioactive waste are created. It is also a process being investigated as a means to transform long-lived elements of high-level radioactive waste into shorter-lived elements. Tritium A radioactive isotope of hydrogen having two neutrons and one proton. Tritium is being investigated for use as a fuel for fusion reactions. Because tritium is radioactive and can readily form water it has particular radiation protection concerns. U Undiscovered conventional resources Uranium resources believed to exist and to be exploitable using conventional mining techniques but not yet physically confirmed are classed as undiscovered conventional resources. They include estimated additional resources – category II (EAR-II) and speculative resources (SR). V Vitrification The process of producing glass. It is a technology commonly used to immobilise the high-level waste produced from the reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel. Typically, this glass is of high durability, able to withstand the intense radiation and high heat associated with high-level waste and stable so as to be able to contain the radioactive isotopes over long periods of time. X X-ray X-rays are electromagnetic waves emitted by energy changes in an atom’s electrons. They are a form of high-energy electromagnetic radiation that interacts lightly with matter. Thick layers of lead or other dense materials stop them best. In some cases, there is a necessary and appropriate federal role in overcoming these challenges, consistent with the primary mission of NE to advance nuclear power as a resource capable of making major contributions to meeting the nation’s energy supply, environmental, and energy security needs. This is accomplished by resolving technical, cost, safety, security and proliferation resistance barriers, through research, development, and demonstration, as appropriate. NE’s research and development (R&D) activities will help address challenges and thereby enable the deployment of new reactor technologies that will support the current fleet of reactors and facilitate the construction of new ones The existing U.S. nuclear fleet has a remarkable safety and performance record, and today these reactors account for 70 percent of the low greenhouse gas (GHG)-emitting domestic electricity production. Extending the operating lifetimes of current plants beyond sixty years and, where possible, making further improvements in their productivity will generate near-term benefits. Industry has a significant financial incentive to extend the life of existing plants, and as such, activities will be cost shared. Federal R&D investments are appropriate to answer fundamental scientific questions and, where private investment is insufficient, to help make progress on broadly applicable technology issues that can generate public benefits. The DOE role in this R&D objective is to work in conjunction with industry and where appropriate the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) to support and conduct the long-term research needed to inform major component refurbishment and replacement strategies, performance enhancements, plant license extensions, and age-related regulatory oversight. If nuclear energy is to be a strong component of the nation’s future energy portfolio, barriers to the deployment of new nuclear plants must be overcome. Impediments to new plant deployment, even for those designs based on familiar light-water reactor (LWR) technology, include the substantial capital cost of new plants and the uncertainties in the time required to license and construct those plants. Although subject to their own barriers for deployment, more advanced plant designs, such as small modular reactors (SMRs) and high-temperature reactors (HTRs), have characteristics that could make them more desirable than today’s technology. SMRs, for example, have the potential to achieve lower proliferation risks and more simplified construction than other designs. The development of next-generation reactors could present lower capital costs and improved efficiencies. These reactors may be based upon new designs that take advantage of the advances in high performance computing while leveraging capabilities afforded by improved structural materials. Industry plays a substantial role in overcoming the barriers in this area. DOE provides support through R&D ranging from fundamental nuclear phenomena to the development of advanced fuels that could improve the economic and safety performance of these advanced reactors. Nuclear power can reduce GHG emissions from electricity production and possibly in co-generation by displacing fossil fuels in the generation of process heat for applications including refining and the production of fertilizers and other chemical productions. DOE will focus on aging phenomena and issues that require long-term research and are generic to reactor type Sustainable fuel cycle options are those that improve uranium resource utilization, maximize energy generation, minimize waste generation, improve safety, and limit proliferation risk. The key challenge is to develop a suite of options that will enable future decision makers to make informed choices about how best to manage the used fuel from reactors. The Administration has established the Blue Ribbon Commission on America’s Nuclear Future to inform this waste management decision-making process. DOE will conduct R&D in this area to investigate technical challenges involved with three potential strategies for used fuel management It is important to assure that the benefits of nuclear power can be obtained in a manner that limits nuclear proliferation and security risks. These risks include the related but distinctly separate possibilities that nations may attempt to use nuclear technologies in pursuit of a nuclear weapon and that terrorists might seek to steal material that could be used in a nuclear explosive device. Addressing these concerns requires an integrated approach that incorporates the simultaneous development of nuclear technologies, including safeguards and security technologies and systems, and the maintenance and strengthening of non-proliferation frameworks and protocols. Technological advances can only provide part of an effective response to proliferation risks, as institutional measures such as export controls and safeguards are also essential to addressing proliferation concerns. These activities must be informed by robust assessments developed for understanding, limiting, and managing the risks of nation-state proliferation and physical security for nuclear technologies. NE will focus on assessments required to inform domestic fuel cycle technology and system option development. These analyses would complement those assessments performed by the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) to evaluate nation state proliferation and the international non-proliferation regime. NE will work with other organizations including the NNSA, the Department of State, the NRC, and others in further defining, implementing and executing this integrated approach A goal-driven, science-based approach is essential to achieving the stated objectives while exploring new technologies and seeking transformational advances. This science-based approach, depicted in Figure 1, combines theory, experimentation, and high-performance modelling and simulation to develop the fundamental understanding that will lead to new technologies. Advanced modelling and simulation tools will be used in conjunction with smaller-scale, phenomenon-specific experiments informed by theory to reduce the need for large, expensive integrated experiments. Insights gained by advanced modelling and simulation can lead to new theoretical understanding and, in turn, can improve models and experimental design. This R&D must be informed by the basic research capabilities in the DOE Office of Science (SC). Figure 1. Major Elements of a Science-Based Approach NE maintains access to a broad range of facilities to support its research activities. Hot cells and test reactors are at the top of the hierarchy, followed by smaller-scale radiological facilities, specialty engineering facilities, and small non-radiological laboratories. NE employs a multipronged approach to having these capabilities available when needed. The core capabilities rely on DOE-owned irradiation, examination, chemical processing and waste form development facilities. These are supplemented by university capabilities ranging from research reactors to materials science laboratories. In the course of conducting this science-based R&D, infrastructure needs will be evaluated and considered through the established planning and budget development processes. There is potential to leverage and amplify effective U.S. R&D through collaboration with other nations via multilateral and bilateral agreements, including the Generation IV International Forum. DOE is also a participant in Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development/Nuclear Energy Agency (OECD/NEA) and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) initiatives that bear directly on the development and deployment of new reactor systems. In addition to these R&D activities, international interaction supported by NE and other government agencies will be essential in establishment of international norms and control regimes to address and mitigate proliferation concerns. Access to affordable, abundant energy – chiefly from fossil fuel sources – has been a key enabler of economic growth since the Industrial Revolution. However, as the first decade of the 21st century draws to a close, the United States finds itself confronted with economic, environmental, and national security challenges related in part to the manner in which our society produces, distributes, and uses energy. Continued access to plentiful, secure, and This document identifies opportunities and challenges associated with continued and increased use of fission energy to enhance our nation’s prosperity, security, and environmental quality; outlines the NE role and mission in enabling the benefits of nuclear energy for our nation; and presents a strategy and roadmap to guide the NE scientific and technical agenda. The report presents a high-level vision and framework for R&D activities needed to keep the nuclear energy option viable in the near term and to expand its use in the decades ahead. Section 2 describes the current energy production and utilization landscape in the United States. Section 3 articulates NE’s fundamental mission and role in enabling nuclear energy solutions and presents the four R&D objectives for nuclear energy development that are the focus of NE activities. The details of the roadmap are presented in Section 4. The R&D approach presented in Section 5 embodies a goal-oriented, science-based R&D portfolio that includes both evolutionary and transformational, high-risk–high-payoff R&D, including those research areas that encompass multiple objectives. Finally, Section 6 provides a summary of the objects presented in this report. This report is not an implementation plan, but rather provides a basis that will guide NE’s internal programmatic and strategic planning for research going forward environmentally benign energy is fundamental to overcoming these challenges The report focuses on R&D activities sponsored by NE. The U.S. nuclear industry plays a central role in overcoming barriers and is ultimately responsible for the commercial deployment of the resulting technologies. NE intends to proceed in a manner that supports a strong and viable nuclear industry in the United States and preserves the ability of that industry to participate in nuclear projects here and abroad. Finally, it should be noted that in some limited cases, NE’s mission extends beyond terrestrial deployment of nuclear energy into other arenas, such as space applications of both fission and radioisotope power systems. Some technology development needs identified in this document also benefit space applications, but these mission arenas are not addressed in this roadmap. Educational programs, while vital, are interwoven through the technical programs and are not discussed as separate entities All governments of the world share a common challenge to ensure their people have access to affordable, abundant, and environmentally friendly energy. Secretary of Energy Steven Chu has reiterated the Administration’s position that nuclear is an important part of the energy mix. He has recognized the importance of nuclear energy in meeting this challenge and supports R&D that can help increase the benefits of nuclear energy. A key objective that will shape the energy landscape of the United States is the transition to clean energy sources with reductions in GHG emissions (with a quantitative goal of 83% reduction below 2005 emissions levels by 2050, shown in Figure 2) The Administration’s clean energy and climate change objectives are ambitious and achievable. Successful achievement of these objectives will require solutions to technical challenges associated with various energy sectors, including The primary mission of NE is to advance nuclear power as a resource capable of meeting the nation’s energy, environmental, and national security needs by resolving technical, cost, safety, security, and proliferation resistance, through R&D and demonstrations, as appropriate. Progress in these areas should promote the deployment of.  The existing U.S. nuclear fleet has a remarkable safety and performance record, and today these reactors account for 70 percent of the low GHG-emitting domestic electricity production. Extending the operating lifetimes of current plants beyond sixty years and, where possible, making further improvements in their productivity will generate near-term benefits. Industry has a significant financial incentive to extend the life of existing plants, and as such, activities will be cost shared. Federal R&D investments are appropriate to answer fundamental scientific questions and, where private investment is insufficient, to help make progress on broadly applicable technology issues that can generate public benefits. Fission power systems in a socially acceptable, environmentally sustainable, and economically attractive manner. If nuclear energy is to be a strong component of the nation’s future energy portfolio, barriers to the deployment of new nuclear plants must be overcome. Impediments to new plant deployment, even for those designs based on familiar light-water reactor technology, include the substantial capital cost of new plants and the uncertainties in the time required to license and construct them. More advanced plant designs, such as small modular reactors (SMRs) and high-temperature reactors (HTRs), will have additional barriers for deployment. These reactors have characteristics that could make them more attractive than today’s technology. SMRs, for example, have the potential to achieve lower proliferation risk and more simplified construction than other designs. The development of next-generation reactors could present lower capital costs and improved efficiencies. These reactors may be based upon new designs that take advantage of the advances in high performance computing while leveraging capabilities afforded by improved structural materials. Industry’s role in overcoming the barriers in this area is substantial. DOE supports R&D ranging from fundamental nuclear phenomena to the development of advanced fuels that could improve the economic and safety performance of these advanced reactors. Nuclear power can reduce GHG emissions from electricity production and possibly in co-generation by displacing fossil fuels in the generation of process heat for applications including refining and the production of fertilizers and other chemical products Sustainable fuel cycle options are those that improve uranium resource utilization, maximize energy generation, minimize waste generation, improve safety, and complement institutional measures in limiting proliferation risk. The key challenge for the government in this R&D objective is to develop a suite of options that will enable future decision makers to make informed choices about how best to manage the used fuel from reactors. DOE will conduct R&D in this area to investigate the technical challenges involved with three potential strategies for used fuel management. It is important to assure that access to the benefits of nuclear power can be enabled while limiting nuclear proliferation and security risks. This goal requires an integrated approach that incorporates simultaneous development of nuclear fuel cycle technology, safeguards and security technologies and systems, new proliferation risk assessment tools, and non-proliferation frameworks and protocols. These activities must be informed by robust assessments that identify potential approaches for limiting risks of specific technologies and nuclear fuel cycle system options. NE will work with other organizations such as the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), the Department of State, the NRC, and others in further defining, implementing and executing this integrated approach. Aspects of this research may help to inform the exploration of concepts such as international fuel service arrangements In laying out the activities in each of the R&D objectives described below, we must remain goal oriented to avoid falling into the trap of doing a great deal of work that, while interesting, fails to address the challenges to the deployment of nuclear energy. The following sections highlight areas in which NE may undertake future R&D. These R&D activities have been considered with the end in mind to ensure that the linkage between research and solution is clear. To that end, in depicting the timelines of activity for the R&D objectives below, the charts show a distinction between near-term milestones toward which the NE R&D plan is designed to progress, represented as triangles, and longer-term potential outcomes that provide a framework for the milestones, which are shown as ovals. The milestone charts attempt to depict the stages of development so as not to leave a sense that new technologies can be immediately deployed at a commercial level. Not every milestone or potential outcome outlined in these charts represent actions that are within DOE’s roles and responsibilities, and research paths will include many decision points that require choosing the most promising options for continued R&D. Especially as technology matures, industry has a role and a responsibility to share the costs of making progress. It is ultimately industry’s decision which commercial technologies will be deployed. The federal role falls more squarely in the realm of R&D These long-term milestones and potential outcomes are not set in stone, and in some cases the following sections outline multiple competing paths within an objective, knowing that ultimately only one direction will be chosen. In all cases, the activities, milestones, and plans outlined in this document will be reconsidered and revised periodically to ensure that NE R&D is consistent with priorities and reflects what we have learned from these efforts. Activities will be reviewed and modified as necessary through the established budgetary and decision-making processes Although some smaller component or process “demonstration” activities are mentioned, these are largely field tests and other actions to provide proof or validation of system elements. They are not large-scale demonstrations like the Next Generation Nuclear Plant (NGNP). Any decisions to embark on such large-scale demonstrations will be the result of decision-making processes that include the relevant stakeholders in the Executive Branch and Congress and will be made in accordance with NEPA and DOE Order 413 requirements. This R&D will enable these stakeholders to understand the potential trade offs embodied in these decisions
2030, even those current nuclear power plants that have received 20-year extensions from the NRC authorizing 60 years of life will begin reaching the end of their licensed periods of operation. Figure 8 shows projected nuclear energy contribution to domestic generating capacity from those plants that have already received 20-year license extensions. If current plants do not operate beyond 60 years, the total fraction of generated electricity from nuclear power could begin to decline, even with the addition of new nuclear-generating capacity Industry’s economic incentive to meet these challenges in order to continue the safe and reliable operation of existing plants is tremendous. As such, federal activities undertaken in this area will be cost-shared with industry. Industry, working through EPRI or through the various owners’ groups, will engage some of these problems directly. Federal R&D investments are appropriate to answer fundamental scientific questions and where private investment is insufficient, to help make progress on broadly-applicable technology issues that can generate public benefits. The government holds a great deal of theoretical, computational, and experimental expertise in nuclear R&D that is not available in industry. The benefits of assisting industry with R&D on life-extension apply not only to current plants but also to the next generation of reactor technologies still in development The overall focus of the R&D activities will be to improve a power plant operator’s ability to manage the effects of the aging of passive components and increase operational efficiency and economics. In selecting projects for federal investment, it is vital that due consideration be given not only to how each of the R&D activities support achievement of safety and economic sustainability for existing LWRs, but also to how the R&D results will be more broadly applicable to the next generation of reactor technologies. These activities should also be integrated with outside sources of information and parallel R&D programs in industry, the NRC, universities, and other laboratories, both domestic and international. Close coordination with the NRC as appropriate is needed to assure that R&D programs focus on issues relevant to licensing The following are R&D topics where NE will focus its efforts to help provide solutions to the challenges listed above, thereby helping enable reactor life extension beyond 60 years with improved performance. Progress on this long-term and high-risk–high-reward R&D, which supports the current nuclear power plant fleet, will provide the scientific underpinnings for plant owners to make billion-dollar investment decisions to prolong the economic lifetime of these assets. R&D findings will also inform improvements in the lifetime of future-generation reactor designs Research to address long-term aging and obsolescence of existing instrumentation and control technologies and to develop and test new technologies. Establishing a strategy to implement long-term modernization of II&C systems will be the focus of federal R&D, while industry will focus on the more immediate benefits of adapting existing digital technologies to current plants. NE will work with industry to develop advanced condition monitoring  technologies for reliable plant operation, improved understanding of physical methods of degradation, and the means to detect and characterize these processes A key challenge will be to adapt advanced computer science tools to an applications environment. The hub is intended to create a new state-of-the-art in an engineering-oriented multi-physics computational environment that can be used by a wide range of practitioners to conduct ultra-high fidelity predictive calculations of reactor performance The following chart outlines potential milestones and future national industry aims for this objective. It presents a distinction between near-term milestones toward which the NE R&D plan is designed to progress, represented as triangles, and longer-term potential outcomes that provide a framework for the milestones, shown as ovals. The milestone charts attempt to depict the stages of development so as not to leave a sense that new technologies can be immediately deployed at a commercial level. Not every milestone or potential outcome outlined in these charts represents actions that are within DOE’s roles and responsibilities, and research paths will include many decision points that require choosing the most promising options for continued R&D. All DOE R&D activities will be evaluated and revisited regularly and modified as necessary through the budget process to ensure the portfolio reflects past progress and current priorities The previous 30-year U.S. hiatus in new nuclear plant orders presents a number of immediate hurdles for the construction of new plant designs. Utility investors are still wary of the new regulatory framework, which will not be fully exercised until the first new plant begins operation. There are also concerns regarding the large capital costs of plants and associated difficulties in financing their construction There are several new plant designs, often referred to as Gen III+, that have been certified or are being reviewed by the NRC for immediate deployment in the United States. Potential owners of these Gen III+ plants must overcome serious financial hurdles. All near-term options for new plants are large LWR designs that are optimized for baseload electricity production. Smaller reactors that could be deployed in modules might help reduce the up-front capital costs associated with large plants by allowing utilities to incrementally “step up” to larger electrical capacities while generating revenue and repaying initial debts. New reactor designs beyond Gen III+ may also be deployed. In many cases, new technologies will be needed to enable these new designs, and innovative features will need to be fully demonstrated. Certain aspects of the regulatory framework need to accommodate these new technologies and design features, especially for designs that differ significantly from the large LWR plants in operation today. Economic competitiveness will remain the major hurdle for all novel concepts, including smaller reactors and reactors for non-electric applications In the United States, it is the responsibility of industry to design, construct, and operate commercial nuclear power plants. However, DOE has statutory authority under the Atomic Energy Act to promote and support nuclear energy technologies for commercial applications. In general, appropriate government roles include researching high-potential technologies beyond the investment horizon of industry and also reducing the technical risks of new technologies. In the case of new commercial reactor designs, potential areas of NE involvement could include SMR designs that are not based on LWR technology have the potential to offer added functionality and affordability. In this area, NE will support a range of R&D activities, such as basic physics and materials research and testing, state-of-the-art computer modelling and simulation of reactor systems and components, probabilistic risk analyses of innovative safety designs and features, and other development activities that are necessary to establish the concept’s feasibility for future deployment. For SMRs that are based on concepts with lower levels of technical maturity, the Department will first seek to establish the R&D activities necessary to prove and advance innovative reactor technologies and concepts. The Department will support R&D activities to develop and prove the proposed design concepts. Emphasis will be on advanced reactor technologies that offer simplified operation and maintenance for distributed power and load-following applications and increased proliferation resistance and security. Activities will focus on showing that SMRs provide an innovative reactor technology that is capable of achieving electricity generation and performance objectives that meet market demands and are comparable, in both safety and economics, to the current large baseload nuclear power plants. NE may also support the development of new/revised nuclear industry codes and standards necessary to support licensing and commercialization of innovative designs and, consistent with NRC guidance and regulations, identify activities for DOE funding to enable SMR licensing for deployment in the United States. Future-generation reactor systems will employ advanced technologies and designs to improve performance beyond what is currently attainable. Moving beyond LWR technology, for example, may enable reactors to operate at higher temperatures and improved efficiencies resulting in improved economics. Advanced materials may make reactors easier to construct while also enabling better performance. Improved designs utilizing these advances could reduce the capital costs associated with the current set of reactors being considered. Two prominent examples of advanced reactor technologies worthy of further investigation include An additional potential benefit from nuclear power could be realized through new plant designs that would be used to displace GHG-emitting fuels in the industrial sector while also generating electricity. Some industrial process heat applications require temperatures substantially above the 300–325°C outlet temperature of today’s LWRs. Petroleum refining, for example, requires temperatures in the range of 250-500°C while steam reforming of natural gas requires process heat in the 500-900°C range. Achieving higher output temperatures requires switching to a new coolant technology such as gas, liquid metal, or molten salt. With these coolants, it may be possible to achieve outlet temperatures ranging from over 500°C for liquid metal coolants to over 900°C for helium or molten salt coolants. Achieving these temperatures, however, will require the development and qualification of fuels, materials and instrumentation, particularly at the higher end of the temperature range. Also, the use of coolants other than water will require the development of a variety of plant components and systems such as electromagnetic pumps for liquid metal coolants, compact heat exchangers for gas coolants, and chemical purification systems for molten salt coolants. These coolants will also require the development of new licensing requirements and codes and standards. While the economic market for dedicated process heat from nuclear power may be limited, reactors that could produce electricity as well as industrial process heat may have broader applications The following chart outlines potential milestones and future national industry aims for this objective. It presents a distinction between near-term milestones toward which the NE R&D plan is designed to progress, represented as triangles, and longer-term potential outcomes that provide a framework for the milestones, shown as ovals. The milestone charts attempt to depict the stages of development so as not to leave a sense that new technologies can be immediately deployed at a commercial level. An expansion of nuclear power in the United States will result in a growth of the used nuclear fuel inventories. The Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 gave the U.S. government the mission to safely manage the used fuel from these nuclear power plants. Research and development of sustainable nuclear fuel cycles and waste management activities is important to support the expansion of nuclear energy. Some of the attributes of the sustainable fuel cycle, including waste management and disposal technologies, include the responsible use of natural resources, preservation of the environment for future generations, safety, security, public acceptance, and cost effectiveness An expansion of nuclear power in the United States will result in a growth of the used nuclear fuel inventories. The Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 gave the U.S. government the mission to safely manage the used fuel from these nuclear power plants. Research and development of sustainable nuclear fuel cycles and waste management activities is important to support the expansion of nuclear energy. Some of the attributes of the sustainable fuel cycle, including waste management and disposal technologies, include the responsible use of natural resources, preservation of the environment for future generations, safety, security, public acceptance, and cost effectiveness The discussion above is primarily focused on the uranium fuel cycle that is the norm throughout the world. An alternative that could be considered would be the use of thorium to replace at least part of the uranium in the system. Thorium could be used as part of a once-through, modified open, or full recycle fuel cycle. The appeal of thorium is two-fold. First, thorium is more abundant in nature than uranium and can be used to extend or replace uranium in the fuel cycle. Second, the use of thorium enables reduced production of transuranic elements that end up in used fuel. However, there are still technical and economic challenges facing thorium-based fuels. Thus some R&D to address related challenges may be considered. Significant R&D in the use of thorium has been performed previously in the United States and is currently being considered in other parts of the world (particularly in India) Improving the sustainability of a once-through approach to used fuel management begins with increasing the burnup of the fuel – the amount of energy that can be extracted from fuel in the reactor – which may also have the effect of consuming more actinides in the fuel, leaving less to be disposed. Increasing the burnup of a fuel will require ensuring that both the fuel itself and the structural material designed to keep it in place in the reactor will be able to withstand extended irradiation in the reactor and maintain its integrity when being stored after removal. Deploying advanced fuels will require that they first undergo a qualification process that can take a great deal of time, as researchers must irradiate and conduct examinations on test samples to assure their performance. Also, fuels that are notably different from those currently used in LWRs may drive changes in the fuel processing infrastructure that has evolved to meet current needs. To the extent that the deployed once-through fuel cycle is built upon enriched uranium fuels, the proliferation concerns associated with enrichment technologies will need to be addressed A modified open cycle faces some of the same challenges as the once-through, along with some encountered in a full recycle approach. The modified open cycle introduces the possibility of a used fuel separations step to enable more options for producing fuels. This flexibility enables the inclusion of transuranic elements – notably plutonium – at concentrations capable of supporting ultra-high burnup, along with the attendant difficulties of developing these fuels. The challenges of developing high-burnup fuels discussed in the previous paragraph are applicable to this strategy. The use of separations technology to prepare the ultra-high-burnup fuel introduces difficulties in separations as well as managing proliferation concerns. A key element of this fuel cycle is the likely need to introduce advanced reactors that can utilize these new fuels. The overarching challenge in making a modified open cycle worthwhile is to determine if the improvement in fuel resource utilization and in the waste to be disposed is sufficient to justify the additional complication, potential proliferation concerns, and expense this approach would entail In a full recycle approach, used fuel is not directly disposed in a repository; rather, those elements of the used fuel that are deemed appropriate for recycling are reintroduced into reactors or other systems while the remaining elements are stabilized in a waste form and disposed. This strategy offers the potential of waste forms that pose far less long-term concern, although the approach would require overcoming not only technical challenges but also economic, proliferation, and public perception concerns. This system would rely on multiple separations processes that must minimize process losses and waste generation while addressing proliferation concerns. Furthermore, fuels must be developed that will allow for the inclusion of all of those elements that are to be recycled in concentrations that vary over time. This is a central tradeoff in the full recycle approach: the more elements that are recycled, the better the waste form will be; however, more separation of elements in the fuel increases the technical and other challenges. Elements that are recycled must be capable of transmutation in a system – likely, but not necessarily, a fast reactor – to eventually eliminate them. In order for a full recycle strategy to be considered, the waste benefits and improved resource utilization produced by such a system must outweigh the complication, expense and potential proliferation concerns associated with it There are major R&D needs to understand how best to overcome the challenges posed by each of the fuel cycle approaches being considered. The potential R&D efforts that DOE would undertake would have a long-term view and would be science-based. It would take considerable time before the issues in the modified open and the full recycle alternatives would be overcome. Many R&D areas will be applicable to multiple strategies. Prior to beginning major R&D work in these areas, analyses will be performed to gauge the likely value of the efforts. • Fuel Resource Exploration and Mining – The availability of fuel resources for each potential fuel cycle and reactor deployment scenario must be understood. Extended use of nuclear power may drive improvements in defining resource availability and on fuel resource exploration and mining. Primarily, this is work that the private sector would undertake, and how and when this would occur would depend on price and other market conditions. This is most relevant for a once-through approach, but even modified open cycles and full recycle systems may require comparable levels of natural sources of fuel for the foreseeable future. Most appropriate for federal involvement in this area would be R&D to support investigation of long-term, “game-changing” approaches such as recovering uranium from seawater. • Used Fuel Disposition – All radioactive wastes generated by existing and future fuel cycles will need to be safely stored, transported, and disposed. This R&D will identify options for performing these functions, including research into disposal in a variety of geologic environments. This R&D will consider used fuel and high-level waste inventories arising from the current reactor fleet and any additional new builds, including the potential for changing used fuel characteristics from enhanced operations (e.g., increased fuel burnup) and the projected inventories from advanced reactor and fuel cycle systems (e.g., HTRs and SMRs). This research is important to all of the potential fuel cycle approaches. • Reduce Transuranic Production In Reactors – One thrust in developing sustainable fuel cycles will be the exploration of nuclear fuels and reactors that significantly reduce the long-lived actinide content of the used fuel per MWh of energy produced. Exploration of There are major R&D needs to understand how best to overcome the challenges posed by each of the fuel cycle approaches being considered. The potential R&D efforts that DOE would undertake would have a long-term view and would be science-based. It would take considerable time before the issues in the modified open and the full recycle alternatives would be overcome. Many R&D areas will be applicable to multiple strategies. Prior to beginning major R&D work in these areas, analyses will be performed to gauge the likely value of the efforts. • Fuel Resource Exploration and Mining – The availability of fuel resources for each potential fuel cycle and reactor deployment scenario must be understood. Extended use of nuclear power may drive improvements in defining resource availability and on fuel resource exploration and mining. Primarily, this is work that the private sector would undertake, and how and when this would occur would depend on price and other market conditions. This is most relevant for a once-through approach, but even modified open cycles and full recycle systems may require comparable levels of natural sources of fuel for the foreseeable future. Most appropriate for federal involvement in this area would be R&D to support investigation of long-term, “game-changing” approaches such as recovering uranium from seawater. • Used Fuel Disposition – All radioactive wastes generated by existing and future fuel cycles will need to be safely stored, transported, and disposed. This R&D will identify options for performing these functions, including research into disposal in a variety of geologic environments. This R&D will consider used fuel and high-level waste inventories arising from the current reactor fleet and any additional new builds, including the potential for changing used fuel characteristics from enhanced operations (e.g., increased fuel burnup) and the projected inventories from advanced reactor and fuel cycle systems (e.g., HTRs and SMRs). This research is important to all of the potential fuel cycle approaches. • Reduce Transuranic Production In Reactors – One thrust in developing sustainable fuel cycles will be the exploration of nuclear fuels and reactors that significantly reduce the long-lived actinide content of the used fuel per MWh of energy produced. Exploration of focus on broadly applicable issues including areas such as materials and energy conversion. In addition, studies may be conducted to review the technical and economic aspects of external neutron source-driven transmutation systems to inform whether future investigation in this approach is warranted. program will provide a more complete understanding of the underlying science supporting the development of advanced fuel cycle and waste management technologies and, therefore, help provide a sound basis for future decision making. The program will also conduct scientific research and technology development to enable storage, transportation, and disposal of used nuclear fuel and all radioactive wastes generated by existing and future nuclear fuel cycles. Over the next decade, the R&D program will mainly be geared to ensuring that the needed breakthroughs and advancements are available and ready when needed. Examples of such technologies would include ultra-deep-burn LWR, HTR, or fast reactor fuel; reactor technologies to support optimized once-through fuel cycles; and advanced fast reactor concepts to support closed fuel cycles. These technologies would encompass all of the known and anticipated advances that could be expected to be available in areas including materials, design methods, components, and energy conversion. In keeping with Secretary Chu's vision of using science to provide technological breakthroughs to solve America's grand challenges, the program will include long-term, high-risk–high-payoff R&D. This part of the program will seek revolutionary and transformational breakthroughs in systems, materials and components of the fuel cycle that can better meet the program's objectives. Examples of this could include novel reactor concepts such as molten-salt fuel reactors or thorium fuel cycles. Thus, while evolutionary advancements are being made, revolutionary advancements will also be pursued such that, if successful, they could replace all or part of existing or near-term technologies. The roadmap includes milestones for selection of technologies as the program matures. Each approach has a set of reference technologies associated with these milestones program will provide a more complete understanding of the underlying science supporting the development of advanced fuel cycle and waste management technologies and, therefore, help provide a sound basis for future decision making. The program will also conduct scientific research and technology development to enable storage, transportation, and disposal of used nuclear fuel and all radioactive wastes generated by existing and future nuclear fuel cycles. Over the next decade, the R&D program will mainly be geared to ensuring that the needed breakthroughs and advancements are available and ready when needed. Examples of such technologies would include ultra-deep-burn LWR, HTR, or fast reactor fuel; reactor technologies to support optimized once-through fuel cycles; and advanced fast reactor concepts to support closed fuel cycles. These technologies would encompass all of the known and anticipated advances that could be expected to be available in areas including materials, design methods, components, and energy conversion. In keeping with Secretary Chu's vision of using science to provide technological breakthroughs to solve America's grand challenges, the program will include long-term, high-risk–high-payoff R&D. This part of the program will seek revolutionary and transformational breakthroughs in systems, materials and components of the fuel cycle that can better meet the program's objectives. Examples of this could include novel reactor concepts such as molten-salt fuel reactors or thorium fuel cycles. Thus while evolutionary advancements are being made, revolutionary advancements will also be pursued such that, if successful, they could replace all or part of existing or near-term technologies. The roadmap includes milestones for selection of technologies as the program matures. Each approach has a set of reference technologies associated with these milestones Although some smaller component or process “demonstration” activities are mentioned, these are largely field tests and other actions to provide proof or validation of system elements. They are not costly, large-scale demonstrations like NGNP. Any consideration to embark on such large-scale demonstrations will be the result of decision-making and budget development processes The final R&D objective for nuclear energy is to enable secure nuclear energy expansion by developing and demonstrating options that limit proliferation and physical security risks associated with nuclear power while also achieving economic, public health and safety, and environmental goals. These risks include not only the possibility that nations may attempt to use nuclear technologies in pursuit of a nuclear weapon, but also the concern that terrorists might seek to steal material that could be used in a nuclear explosive device. This requires NE advocacy for, and participation in, an integrated program to develop technologies, frameworks, and policy options for the future nuclear enterprise, cutting across all aspects of the fuel cycle. The United States has extensive experience protecting nuclear materials, from the weapons program that has produced significant quantities of plutonium-239 and highly enriched uranium, to 104 commercial reactors in the U.S. today that handle, use, and store nuclear materials. Internationally, the U.S. has also contributed extensively to the development of technologies now used in the application of international safeguards to monitor used fuel recycling activities in England, France, and Japan. Going forward, safeguards and physical security will become even more integral components in the domestic and global expansion of nuclear power, including the development of future fuel cycle and reactor technologies that further increase The final R&D objective for nuclear energy is to enable secure nuclear energy expansion by developing and demonstrating options that limit proliferation and physical security risks associated with nuclear power while also achieving economic, public health and safety, and environmental goals. These risks include not only the possibility that nations may attempt to use nuclear technologies in pursuit of a nuclear weapon, but also the concern that terrorists might seek to steal material that could be used in a nuclear explosive device. This requires NE advocacy for, and participation in, an integrated program to develop technologies, frameworks, and policy options for the future nuclear enterprise, cutting across all aspects of the fuel cycle. The United States has extensive experience protecting nuclear materials, from the weapons program that has produced significant quantities of plutonium-239 and highly enriched uranium, to 104 commercial reactors in the U.S. today that handle, use, and store nuclear materials. Internationally, the U.S. has also contributed extensively to the development of technologies now used in the application of international safeguards to monitor used fuel recycling activities in England, France, and Japan. Going forward, safeguards and physical security will become even more integral components in the domestic and global expansion of nuclear power, including the development of future fuel cycle and reactor technologies that further increase the barriers against proliferation and nuclear terrorism the barriers against proliferation and nuclear terrorism. The final R&D objective for nuclear energy is to enable secure nuclear energy expansion by developing and demonstrating options that limit proliferation and physical security risks associated with nuclear power while also achieving economic, public health and safety, and environmental goals. These risks include not only the possibility that nations may attempt to use nuclear technologies in pursuit of a nuclear weapon, but also the concern that terrorists might seek to steal material that could be used in a nuclear explosive device. This requires NE advocacy for, and participation in, an integrated program to develop technologies, frameworks, and policy options for the future nuclear enterprise, cutting across all aspects of the fuel cycle. The United States has extensive experience protecting nuclear materials, from the weapons program that has produced significant quantities of plutonium-239 and highly enriched uranium, to 104 commercial reactors in the U.S. today that handle, use, and store nuclear materials. Internationally, the U.S. has also contributed extensively to the development of technologies now used in the application of international safeguards to monitor used fuel recycling activities in England, France, and Japan. Going forward, safeguards and physical security will become even more integral components in the domestic and global expansion of nuclear power, including the development of future fuel cycle and reactor technologies that further increase the barriers against proliferation and nuclear terrorism. The final R&D objective for nuclear energy is to enable secure nuclear energy expansion by developing and demonstrating options that limit proliferation and physical security risks associated with nuclear power while also achieving economic, public health and safety, and environmental goals. These risks include not only the possibility that nations may attempt to use nuclear technologies in pursuit of a nuclear weapon, but also the concern that terrorists might seek to steal material that could be used in a nuclear explosive device. This requires NE advocacy for, and participation in, an integrated program to develop technologies, frameworks, and policy options for the future nuclear enterprise, cutting across all aspects of the fuel cycle. The United States has extensive experience protecting nuclear materials, from the weapons program that has produced significant quantities of plutonium-239 and highly enriched uranium, to 104 commercial reactors in the U.S. today that handle, use, and store nuclear materials. Internationally, the U.S. has also contributed extensively to the development of technologies now used in the application of international safeguards to monitor used fuel recycling activities in England, France, and Japan. Going forward, safeguards and physical security will become even more integral components in the domestic and global expansion of nuclear power, including the development of future fuel cycle and reactor technologies that further increase the barriers against proliferation and nuclear terrorism. The final R&D objective for nuclear energy is to enable secure nuclear energy expansion by developing and demonstrating options that limit proliferation and physical security risks associated with nuclear power while also achieving economic, public health and safety, and environmental goals. These risks include not only the possibility that nations may attempt to use nuclear technologies in pursuit of a nuclear weapon, but also the concern that terrorists might seek to steal material that could be used in a nuclear explosive device. This requires NE advocacy for, and participation in, an integrated program to develop technologies, frameworks, and policy options for the future nuclear enterprise, cutting across all aspects of the fuel cycle. The United States has extensive experience protecting nuclear materials, from the weapons program that has produced significant quantities of plutonium-239 and highly enriched uranium, to 104 commercial reactors in the U.S. today that handle, use, and store nuclear materials. Internationally, the U.S. has also contributed extensively to the development of technologies now used in the application of international safeguards to monitor used fuel recycling activities in England, France, and Japan. Going forward, safeguards and physical security will become even more integral components in the domestic and global expansion of nuclear power, including the development of future fuel cycle and reactor technologies that further increase the barriers against proliferation and nuclear terrorism. Today’s key challenges are to take the wealth of knowledge and experience that exists within the international safeguards and physical security communities and to deploy advanced, affordable techniques to immediately detect the diversion of nuclear materials or the modification of systems. The key technical challenges that must be addressed include Today’s key challenges are to take the wealth of knowledge and experience that exists within the international safeguards and physical security communities and to deploy advanced, affordable techniques to immediately detect the diversion of nuclear materials or the modification of systems. The key technical challenges that must be addressed include Today’s key challenges are to take the wealth of knowledge and experience that exists within the international safeguards and physical security communities and to deploy advanced, affordable techniques to immediately detect the diversion of nuclear materials or the modification of systems. The key technical challenges that must be addressed include The following chart outlines potential milestones and future national industry aims for this objective. It presents a distinction between near-term milestones toward which the NE R&D plan is designed to progress, represented as triangles, and longer-term potential outcomes that provide a framework for the milestones, shown as ovals. The milestone charts attempt to depict the stages of development so as not to leave a sense that new technologies can be immediately deployed at a commercial level The following chart outlines potential milestones and future national industry aims for this objective. It presents a distinction between near-term milestones toward which the NE R&D plan is designed to progress, represented as triangles, and longer-term potential outcomes that provide a framework for the milestones, shown as ovals. The milestone charts attempt to depict the stages of development so as not to leave a sense that new technologies can be immediately deployed at a commercial l The following chart outlines potential milestones and future national industry aims for this objective. It presents a distinction between near-term milestones toward which the NE R&D plan is designed to progress, represented as triangles, and longer-term potential outcomes that provide a framework for the milestones, shown as ovals. The milestone charts attempt to depict the stages of development so as not to leave a sense that new technologies can be immediately deployed at a commercial level While the state of knowledge can be significantly advanced through the combination of experiments, theory, and modelling and simulation, there may be instances where it is appropriate to work with the private sector to further develop and validate laboratory findings. Demonstrations can be a useful element in proving viability of new technologies, but their high cost must be considered in the context of a variety of other factors. There must be sufficient industry commitment for deployment of commercial technologies before such demonstrations would be considered. Any potential future demonstration activities will be evaluated on a case by case basis through the established decision-making procedures of the Department and budget formulation A set of enabling technologies has been identified that support progress on multiple objectives. Where NE has an R&D role in these technology areas, coordination of NE’s activities across these technologies must be implemented. For example, the NE “owner” of the fuel cycle objective Advanced radiation and corrosion-resistant materials with extension to high-temperature applications benefit many of the R&D objectives, especially when conducted using a science-based development approach without relying heavily on empirical experiments in such a case will be responsible for coordination of all nuclear fuel work across objectives. The development of improved and advanced nuclear fuels is clearly a major objective for both existing LWRs and the entire spectrum of advanced nuclear energy systems discussed throughout this document. The short list of potentially needed fuels include high-burnup LWR, fast reactor, and gas-reactor fuels; coated-particle fuels; fast-spectrum and thermal-spectrum transmutation fuels and targets; thorium fuels; and molten-salt fuels. A tightly coordinated and well-integrated nuclear fuels R&D program must be developed to support all of the R&D objectives. The development of advanced reactor concepts and supporting technologies is a core function of NE. Advanced technologies and reactor concepts are needed to improve the economics of electricity production. Multiple advanced reactor concepts (LWR, small modular, gas-cooled, liquid metal-cooled, molten salt-cooled, etc.) may play a role in our nuclear future. The development of a robust advanced reactor system concept definition capability will be an important element of NE strategy development The development and implementation of digital instrumentation and control systems will benefit current reactors as well as future reactors. Advanced instrumentation and control systems will also benefit future fuel cycle facilities. Safeguards technology development also relies on advanced instrumentation and plant control systems through safeguards-by-design Advanced power conversion systems will lead to increased efficiency for the future reactors and facilitate the use of nuclear power in markets requiring process heat Advanced dry-heat-rejection systems will improve the environmental friendliness of the nuclear power plants and enable the deployment of nuclear energy in areas where water constraints might otherwise preclude its use This report has noted the wide variety of fuel cycle options that may be needed in the future to address U.S. energy security, economic, and sustainability goals. Our future ability to sustainably and economically recycle LWR fuels, fast reactor fuels, gas-cooled reactor fuels, molten salt fuels, etc. will depend, in part, on our ability to separate key elements from the waste that will not be disposed in a repository The ability to engineer, produce, and manage fuel cycle waste forms that are chemically and structurally stable over relevant periods of time from decades to hundreds of thousands of years (depending on the radioisotope) is critical to achieving a sustainable fuel cycle and must be closely integrated with both radiochemical research and repository systems research The ability to engineer, produce, and manage fuel cycle waste forms that are chemically and structurally stable over relevant periods of time from decades to hundreds of thousands of years (depending on the radioisotope) is critical to achieving a sustainable fuel cycle and must be closely integrated with both radiochemical research and repository systems research  techniques will benefit not only novel reactor concepts but other nuclear facilities needed for the fuel cycle. • Advanced Modelling and Simulation – The science-based approach relies heavily on fundamental experiments combined with associated theories for predictive capabilities. However, a comprehensive use of the science-based approach for predictive tools with multiple interrelated phenomenology requires advances in computational sciences where phenomena at different time and length scales can be bridged into an engineering code using modern computational platforms. Ultimately all design and safety tools for nuclear systems must be validated with underpinning experimental data. Without such a foundation in reality, licensing these systems would be virtually impossible. Experiments also provide essential waypoints for guiding the development of technology. Having such an experimental capability requires that nuclear energy R&D maintain access to a broad range of facilities from small-scale laboratories potentially up to full prototype demonstrations. Hot cells and test reactors are at the top end of the hierarchy, followed by smaller-scale radiological facilities, specialty engineering facilities, and non radiological small laboratories	The high cost of creating and maintaining physical infrastructure for nuclear R&D, including the necessary safety and security infrastructure, requires creativity and periodic realignment of infrastructure planning with programmatic direction. NE successfully employs a solid approach to maintaining infrastructure. The approach concentrates the high-risk nuclear facilities at the remote Idaho site, maintains unique capabilities at other sites if required, supports vital university infrastructure, negotiates equitable capability exchanges with trusted international partners, refurbishes and reequips essential facilities if required, addresses maintenance backlogs to ensure safe operation, and makes efficient use of modelling, simulation, and single-effect experiments The decision to deploy nuclear energy systems is made by industry and the private sector in market-based economies. However, it is important that industry is engaged during the definition and execution of the R&D phase and that industry participate in joint demonstration activities if such demonstration is deemed necessary and appropriate to facilitate commercialization and deployment of the resulting technologies and systems. As technologies are developed, cost-sharing with industry is an integral part of NE’s agenda. DOE will proceed in a manner that recognizes the importance Strong participation and leadership by the United States in international nuclear R&D, safety and non-proliferation programs is essential. Nuclear energy worldwide must be deployed with safety and security of paramount importance. In addition, several countries have established strong nuclear R&D programs and specialized expertise from which the United States can benefit, such as the leadership position of Russia, France, and Japan in fast reactor technology. Collaborations in nuclear technology R&D will be implemented through bilateral and multilateral agreements and through international organizations such as the Generation IV International Forum stance of maintaining a strong and viable nuclear industry In order for nuclear power to continue to be a viable energy option in any country, including the United States, nuclear safety, security, and safeguards must be maintained at the highest levels on a global scale. DOE will help to achieve consensus criteria for safe reactor operation through international organizations, such as the World Association of Nuclear Operators, and seek to enhance safety standards for nuclear power, promote appropriate infrastructure at the national and international levels, and minimize proliferation risks from the expansion of nuclear power through its participation with the IAEA and related organizations In order to meet the Administration’s goals of energy security and greenhouse gas reductions, nuclear energy must play an important role in the national energy portfolio. NE’s derived missions in support of these national goals are to enable the development and deployment of fission power systems for the production of electricity and process heat. Four research and development objectives have been identified, which will guide NE’s program and strategic planning. Progress in these areas will help ensure that nuclear energy continues to be among the suite of available U.S. energy Each chemical element consists of atoms with a fixed number of particles in its core or ‘nucleus’. Heavy, positively charged particles are called ‘protons’, and neutrally charged particles of a similar mass to protons are called ‘neutrons’. These neutrons bind the nucleus together by a ‘strong nuclear force’ despite the repulsion from the positively charged protons. Each nucleus is also surrounded by a cloud of negatively charged ‘electrons’. Hydrogen has only one proton, so does not require neutrons to bind the nucleus together, although other isotopes of hydrogen – deuterium and tritium – do have neutrons. In contrast, uranium is a complex chemical element with 92 protons in its nucleus, but the number of neutrons varies according to the type of uranium, forming what are known as isotopes. These are different forms of the same chemical element – they possess the same physical properties – but they have a different number of neutrons. An introduction to nuclear power: science, technology and UK policy context www.sd-commission.org.uk Uranium has six isotopes, three natural and three synthetic. They are denoted by the number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus, for example uranium-238 has 92 protons and 146 neutrons, in contrast to uranium-234, with only 142 neutrons. The process by which nuclear energy is expelled is called fission. When bombarded with slow (low energy) neutrons the U-235 isotope becomes the very short lived U-236 which immediately divides into two smaller nuclei, liberating energy and more neutrons. If these neutrons are absorbed by other U235 nuclei, a nuclear chain reaction occurs, and if there is nothing to absorb some neutrons and slow the reaction (as in a nuclear reactor), it is explosive (as in a nuclear bomb). Over 60% of neutrons released from fission do not go on to cause subsequent fission reactions in other nuclei. Many are lost to the vessel walls, absorbed by residual fission products and even absorbed by the fuel itself. For example, plutonium-239 is formed by the absorption of one neutron into uranium-238. To get Plutonium from Uranium you also need two electrons and two protons. neutron absorbing material – inserted into the core to absorb a specific level of neutrons. Full insertion of these control rods shuts down the reactor completely The neutrons are moderated using a variety of chemical elements. First generation reactors used graphite, which is very effective at absorbing kinetic energy because of its stable structure. Contemporary designs more often use water, as hydrogen also effectively moderates neutrons and water is easy to manage. ‘Light water’ is normal H20 and is used in Light Water Reactors (LWR), whereas ‘heavy water’ consists of deuterium, an isotope of hydrogen. Deuterium has one neutron and one proton whereas hydrogen lacks neutrons altogether. It is naturally present in water, particularly sea water, but must be distilled and extracted to manufacture heavy water (D20) for Heavy Water Reactors (HWR) 1 . Although light water is an extremely efficient moderator, it also has high neutron absorption, thus requiring more fissile fuel than natural uranium can provide. LWRs therefore use enriched fuel. By contrast, heavy water reactors HWRs have a low neutron absorption so can use the less fissile natural uranium, but are less efficient at moderating neutron speed2 . To achieve the same level of efficiency for both moderators, heavy water vessels generally need to be larger, to ensure a greater number of collisions. Recent Canadian designs have helped to overcome this by storing heavy water in a large tank called a calandria. It is penetrated by several pressure tubes around the fuel, improving moderation. Some reactors (called ‘fast reactors’ or ‘fast breeders’) do not need a moderator as they utilize the energy of fast neutrons. Fast reactors are discussed further The plant must be located close to a water source because of the need for large amounts of water for cooling. If there is a low flow rate, cooling towers are also needed to improve cooling capacity. A closed-cycle cooling system involves the use of cooling towers to recycle the same water while an open cooling system ejects the water back into the original water source (usually a nearby river) after use. The coolant in a reactor provides two functions; to ensure the safety of the reactor by maintaining the correct temperature, and to facilitate the extraction of useful heat from the reactor. Although gas-cooled designs exist which use helium or CO2 as coolant (most UK reactors are gas-cooled), water is more commonly used, and in many cases, the coolant and moderator are the same. In a pressurised water reactor (PWR) the coolant is heated but does not boil as it is kept at high pressure to raise the boiling point. The water then rises and passes through the heat exchanger, the mechanism by which heat from the radioactive coolant is transferred to non-radioactive water. Metallic pipes conduct the heat to a secondary cooling circuit, which converts the water to steam to drive the turbine for electricity. A CANDU heavy water system works using the same principles. In contrast, a boiling water reactor (BWR) has only one cooling circuit, with lower pressure, so water boils in the core and the steam is siphoned off to drive the turbines. Coolant also plays a vital role in maintaining the temperature of the reactor core even after the chain reaction has stopped, as ‘decay heat’ from fission can be intense for a long time. Some serious nuclear incidents have been as a result of ‘loss of coolant accidents’ (LOCAs), demonstrating its importance in sustaining safety as well as the efficient operation of the plan Uranium is a naturally occurring radioactive element. Radioactivity is a normal characteristic of the environment, identifiable in three forms: alpha, beta and gamma. Alpha particles have large mass, carrying significant energy which can cause tissue damage, although these particles are easily blocked by other elements. The only major risk comes from ingestion of alpha radiation. Beta radiation is less harmful to tissue but can penetrate materials more easily. Gamma rays are a high-energy x rays, with no mass or electrical charge but with high penetration. In a nuclear power plant, there are three barriers to prevent radioactivity escaping into the environment during operation: the fuel cladding itself, the steel reactor vessel and the concrete containment building. With regard to post-operational radioactivity, high-level wastes (HLW) are the most problematic because of their self-heating properties. High levels of radioactivity have the ability to cause tissue death by ionising living cells. At lower levels, ionisation may lead to mutation of the cells possibly leading to cancer Radioactive material can lose its radioactivity over time through decay. The half-life of a material is the time it takes for 50% of the radionuclide to decay. For radioactive isotopes this can range from seconds to thousands of years, the atoms in each isotope having the same probability of decay and the release of radiation. As a rule of thumb, the radioactivity of an isotope reduces to around zero after 6 half-lives Uranium ore is usually mined using open-cut or underground techniques, depending on the location of the reserves. In situ leaching is also practiced in some areas, where uranium is brought to the surface in solution form by leaching liquid through the ore body. Whilst this technique produces little waste rock or landscape disturbance it is only possible in areas where groundwater sources are unaffected. Solid ore is sent to a nearby mill, where it is processed to a slurry and leached with sulphuric acid to separate the uranium from the waste rock (tailings). The slurry is then precipitated to create a uranium oxide concentrate (U308) often termed ‘yellowcake’. Around 200 tons of U308 is required for a 1000MWe reactor each year3 . The overburden from the open cut mining and mill tailings (which contain radium) are then used to backfill the site following extraction, or sometimes as aggregate for the construction industry. There are no uranium mines in the UK although every other stage of the fuel cycle is undertaken domestically The gaseous diffusion technique is the most prevalent in the US, where uranium hexafluoride is heated and pushed through a series of filters, which the slightly lighter U235 particles pass through to create an enriched supply of fuel. The centrifuge process also uses uranium hexafluoride, but instead the gas is fed into rotating vacuum tubes which separate the heavier atoms on the outside of the tube from the lighter U235 atoms on the inside at high speed. The capacity of this technique to separate isotopes is much greater t more fissile material to sustain a reaction than natural uranium can provide. Natural uranium contains only 0.7% of the fissile uranium-235 isotope. Virtually all of the remaining 99.3% is non-fissile uranium-238. Enrichment involves increasing the proportion of fissile material in a given quantity of fuel. Proportions of around 3-4% are necessary for most modern plants, fuel that is termed ‘low-enriched uranium’ in contrast to the highly enriched uranium needed for military purposes. There are three methods of enrichment technique: the gaseous diffusion process, the gas centrifuge method and enrichment by laser manipulation. The world’s endowment of uranium ore is now so depleted that the nuclear industry will never, from its own resources, be able to generate the energy it needs to clear up its own backlog of waste. It is essential that the waste should be made safe and placed in permanent storage. High-level wastes, in their temporary storage facilities, have to be managed and kept cool to prevent fire and leaks which would otherwise contaminate large areas. Shortages of uranium – and the lack of realistic alternatives – leading to interruptions in supply, can be expected to start in the middle years of the decade 2010-2019, and to deepen thereafter. The task of disposing finally of the waste could not, therefore, now be completed using only energy generated by the nuclear industry, even if the whole of the industry’s output were to be devoted to it. In order to deal with its waste, the industry will need to be a major net user of energy, almost all of it from fossil fuels. Every stage in the nuclear process, except fission, produces carbon dioxide. As the richest ores are used up, emissions will rise. Uranium enrichment uses large volumes of uranium hexafluoride, a halogenated compound (HC). Other HCs are also used in the nuclear life-cycle. HCs are greenhouse gases with global warming potentials ranging up to 10,000 times that of carbon dioxide. An independent audit should now review these findings. The quality of available data is poor, and totally inadequate in relation to the importance of the nuclear question. The audit should set out an energy-budget which establishes how much energy will be needed to make all nuclear waste safe, and where it will come from. It should also supply a briefing on the consequences of the worldwide waste backlog being abandoned untreated. There is no single solution to the coming energy gap. What is needed is a speedy program of Lean Energy, comprising: (1) energy conservation and efficiency; (2) structural change in patterns of energy-use and land-use; and (3) renewable energy; all within (4) a framework for managing the energy descent, such as Tradable Energy Quotas (TEQs). The main objectives of energy policy must be (1) to achieve a profound reduction in the release of the gases that are changing the climate, and (2) to find other ways of maintaining the energy services we need as supplies of oil and gas decline towards depletion. Nuclear power seems at first sight to have something to offer here. It does not depend on oil, gas or coal as its primary fuel. It is based on a process which does not, in itself, produce carbon dioxide. It is concentrated in a relatively small number of very large plants, so that it fits easily into the national grid. And there is even the theoretical prospect of it being able to breed its own fuel. So – what’s the problem? The question is considered here in the six chapters of this short study, which is intended as a readable introduction to the nuclear question for everyone interested in, or involved in, the debate about it. It starts here with a short description of the principles, explaining what nuclear energy is. Chapter 2 describes what has to be done in order to derive energy from uranium. Chapter 3 explains why the nuclear industry is in fact a substantial source of carbon emissions, and it makes the link with the problem of uranium depletion and the wider question of the amount of energy that has to be put into the process to get energy out of it. Chapter 4 asks whether there are alternative sources of the uranium fuel on which the industry depends, and chapter 5 sets nuclear energy in context with the energy problem as a whole. Chapter 6 draws conclusions. Now for the principles. The form of nuclear power available to us at present comes from nuclear fission, fueled by uranium. Uranium-235 is an isotope of uranium with the rare and useful property that, when struck by a neutron, it splits into two and, in the process, produces more neutrons. Some of these neutrons then proceed to split more atoms of uranium-235 in a chain of events which produces a huge amount of energy. We can get an idea of how much energy it produces by looking at Einstein’s famous equation, E=mc2, which says that the energy produced is the mass multiplied by the square of the speed of light. A little bit of mass disappears – we can think of this as the material weighing slightly less at the end of the process than at the beginning – and it is that “missing” mass which turns into energy which can be used to make steam to drive turbines and produce electricity. While other neutrons from the reaction go their separate ways, some go on to do something very interesting: if one collides with an atom of uranium-238, one of the other isotopes of uranium, it may stay there, triggering a couple of decay cycles to form plutonium-239. And plutonium-239 shares with uranium-235 the property that it, too, splits when struck by neutrons, so that it begins to act as a fuel as well. The process can be controlled; the control is provided by a moderator consisting of water or graphite, which speeds the reaction up, and by neutron-absorbing boron control rods, which slow it down. Eventually, however, the uranium gets clogged with radioactive impurities such as the barium and krypton produced when uranium-235 decays, along with “transuranic” elements such as americium and neptunium, and a lot of the uranium-235 itself gets used up. It takes a year or two for this to happen, but eventually the fuel elements have to be removed, and fresh ones inserted. The spent fuel elements are very hot and radioactive (stand close to them for a second or two and you are dead), so there are some tricky questions about what to do with them. Sometimes spent fuel is recycled (reprocessed), to extract the remaining uranium and plutonium and use them again, although you don’t get as much fuel back as you started with, and the bulk of impurities still has to be disposed of. Alternatively, the whole lot is disposed of – but there is more to this than just dumping it somewhere, for it never really goes away. The half-life of uranium-238, one of the largest constituents of the waste, is about the same as the age of the earth: 5 billion years. Those are the principles. Now for a closer look at what nuclear energy means. An informed discussion is especially needed, now that James Lovelock has produced his devastating challenge, arguing that climate change is so real, so advanced and potentially so catastrophic that the risks associated with nuclear power are trivial by comparison – and that there is no alternative. Nuclear energy, he insists, is the only large-scale option: it is feasible and practical; a nuclear renaissance is needed without delay. Well, this is undoubtedly something we need to think about and decide on; however, that thinking must be firmly based on the practical realities of the nuclear fuel cycle. We do not need to get involved in the arcane physics of the nuclear reaction itself, but we do need to know – if we are to make any sense of this – what the production of electricity from nuclear power really involves. And who is “we”? It is all of us, scientists or not: this has to be an informed citizens’ decision.5 The principal source for what follows is the long-sustained program of research on the nuclear energy life-cycle by the nuclear engineer Jan Willem Storm van Leeuwen and the nuclear scientist the late Dr Philip Smith. Their work, based on total immersion in the literature of the science and technology of nuclear power, is motivated not by the intention to make a case either for or against, but to bring the best available information on the energy balance of the nuclear industry to the attention of policy makers and into the public debate. This booklet does not rely exclusively on their research; it refers also to many other studies such as those of the University of Sydney and the U.K. Sustainable Development Commission, along with the work of the World Nuclear Association, the Uranium Information Council, Greenpeace and others. The quality of data about the nuclear energy cycle is poor, and every study reflects this in some way; nonetheless, the analysis by Storm van Leeuwen and Smith, which has benefited from several years of critics’ comments and answered questions and revisions, provides an exhaustive and well researched guide to a sensible view of the future of nuclear energy.6 If there is to be proper and inclusive consultation on the question of nuclear energy, citizens and their representatives need to be aware of some of the principles; for instance, they need to be free of popular misconceptions about the nuclear process producing no carbon dioxide and being an unlimited source of energy. This gentle tour round the nuclear life-cycle explains what happens at each stage – and it turns out, at every stage, to be in trouble. But, as we shall see, a different sort of life cycle is available – a realistic way forward. It replaces the large-scale, central, uniform technical fix with small-scale, local judgment. It adapts to local conditions and enhances skills. It is a life-cycle with promise. To produce electricity from uranium ore, this is what you have to do. 1. Mining and milling. Uranium is widely distributed in the earth’s crust, but only in minute quantities, with the exception of a few places where it has accumulated in concentrations rich enough to be used as an ore. The main deposits of ore, in order of size, are in Australia, Kazakhstan, Canada, South Africa, Namibia, Brazil, the Russian Federation, the USA, and Uzbekistan. There are some rich ores; concentrations of uranium oxide as high as 10 percent have been found, but 0.2 percent (two parts per thousand) or less is usual. Most of the usable “soft” (sandstone) uranium ores have a concentration in the range between 0.2 and 0.01 percent; in the case of “hard” (granite) ore, the usable lower limit is 0.02 percent. The mines are usually open-cast pits which may be up to 250m deep. The deeper deposits require underground workings and some uranium is mined by “in situ leaching”, where hundreds of tons of sulphuric acid, nitric acid, ammonia and other chemicals are injected into the strata and then pumped up again after some 3-25 years, yielding about a quarter of the uranium from the treated rocks and depositing unquantifiable amounts of radioactive and toxic metals into the local environment.7 When it has been mined, the ore is milled to extract the uranium oxide. In the case of ores with a concentration of 0.1 percent, the milling must grind up about 1,000 tons of rock to extract one tonne of the bright yellow oxide called “yellowcake”. Both the oxide and the tailings (that is, the 999 tons of rock that remain) are kept radioactive indefinitely by, for instance, uranium-238, and they contain all thirteen of its radioactive decay products, each one changing its identity as it decays into the next, and together forming a cascade of heavy metals with their spectacularly varied half-lives (see Radioactive Poem opposite). Once these radioactive rocks have been disturbed and milled, they stay around. They take up much more space than they did in their undisturbed state, and their radioactive products are free to be washed and blown away into the environment by rain and wind. These tailings ought therefore to be treated: the acids should be neutralized with limestone and made insoluble with phosphates; the overburden of rock covering the ore strata should be replaced and the area should be replanted with indigenous vegetation. In fact, all this is hardly ever done, and it is regarded as an ideal rather than a requirement of best practice. It would require some four times the energy needed to mine the ore in the first place.8 2. Preparing the fuel. The uranium oxide (U3O8) then has to be enriched. Natural uranium contains about 0.7 percent uranium235; the rest is mainly uranium-234 and - 238, neither of which directly support the needed chain reaction. In order to bring the concentration of uranium-235 up to the required 3.5 percent, the oxide is reacted with fluorine to form uranium hexafluoride (UF6), or “hex”, a substance with the useful property that it changes – sublimes – from a solid to a gas at 56.5°C, and it is as a gas that it is fed into an enrichment plant. About 85 percent of it promptly comes out again as waste in the form of depleted uranium hexafluoride, known as “enrichment tails”.10 Some of that waste is converted into depleted uranium metal, some of which is in turn sometimes distributed back into the environment via its use in armor-piercing shells, but most of it is stored as enrichment tails in the form of gas. It reacts violently or explodes on contact with water (including water vapor in the air), so it ought to be transferred from its temporary containers to steel and concrete containers and buried in geological repositories. In fact, most is put on hold: each year, about 8,000 tons are added to the France’s store of 200,000 tons of depleted uranium, and a further 8,000 tons are exported from Europe to Russia. The 15 percent which emerges as enriched uranium is then converted into ceramic pellets of uranium dioxide (UO2), packed in zirconium alloy tubes, and bundled together to form fuel elements for reactors. Generation. The fuel can now be used to produce heat to raise the steam to generate electricity. In due course the process generates waste in the form of spent fuel elements and, whether these are then reprocessed and re-used or not, eventually they have to be disposed of. But first they must be allowed to cool off in ponds to allow the isotopes to decay to some extent, for between 10 and 100 years – sixty years may be taken as typical. The ponds need a reliable electricity supply to keep them stirred and topped up with water to stop the radioactive fuel elements drying out and catching fire. In due course, these wastes will need to be packed, using remotely-controlled robots, into very secure canisters lined with lead, steel and pure electrolytic copper, in which they must lie buried in giant geological repositories considered to be stable. It may turn out in due course that there is one best solution, but there will never be an ideal way to store waste which will be radioactive for a thousand centuries or more and, whatever option is chosen, it will require a lot of energy. For example, the energy needed over the lifetime of a reactor to manufacture the canisters (each weighing more than ten times as much as the waste they contain), and to make the electrolytic copper, has never been verified, but it is estimated to be about equal to the energy needed to build the reactor in the first place.13 A second form of waste produced in the generation process consists of the routine release of very small amounts of radioactive isotopes such as hydrogen-3 (tritium), carbon-14, plutonium-239 and many others into the local air and water. The significance of this has only recently started to be recognized and investigated.14 A third, less predictable, form of waste occurs in the form of emissions and catastrophic releases in the event of accident. The nuclear industry has good safety systems in place; it must, because the consequences of an accident are so extreme. However, it is not immune to accident. The work is routine, requiring workers to cope with long periods of tedium punctuated by the unexpected, along with “normality-creep” as anomalies become familiar. The hazards were noted in the mid-1990s by a senior nuclear engineer working for the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission: “I believe in nuclear power but after seeing the NRC in action, I’m convinced a serious accident is not just likely, but inevitable... They’re asleep at the wheel.” Every technology has its accidents; indeed, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission estimates the probability of meltdown in the U.S. in a twenty-year period as between 15-45 percent. The risk never goes away; society bears the pain and carries on but, in the case of nuclear power, there is a difference: the consequences of a serious accident – another accident on the scale of Chernobyl, or greater, or much greater – would take nuclear power towards being an uninsurable risk, even with the help of government subsidies for the premiums.15 And a by-product of this – “waste” in the fourth sense – is the plutonium itself which, when isolated and purified in a reprocessing plant, can be brought up to weapons-grade, making it the fuel needed for nuclear proliferation. This is one of three ways in which the industry is the platform from which the proliferation of nuclear weapons can be developed; the second one is by enriching the uranium-235 to around 90 percent, rather than the mere 3.5 percent required by a reactor. The third consists of providing a source of radioactive materials which can be dispersed using conventional explosive - a “dirty bomb”. The reactor. Nuclear reactors at present have a lifetime of about 30- 40 years, but produce electricity at full power for no more than 24 years; the new European Pressurized Water Reactors (EPR), it is claimed, will last longer. During their lifetimes, reactors have to be maintained and (at least once) thoroughly refurbished; eventually, corrosion and intense radioactivity make them impossible to repair. Eventually, they must be dismantled, but experience of this is limited. As a first step, the fuel elements must be put into storage; the cooling system must be cleaned to reduce radioactive corrosion residuals and unidentified deposits (CRUD). These operations, together, produce about 1,000 m3 of high-level waste. After a cooling-off period which may be as much as 50-100 years, the reactor has to be dismantled and cut into small pieces to be packed in containers for final disposal. The total energy required for decommissioning has been estimated at approximately 50 percent more than the energy needed in the original construction. Every stage in the life-cycle of nuclear fission uses energy, and most of this energy is derived from fossil fuels. Nuclear power is therefore a substantial source of greenhouse gases. The delivery of electricity into the grid from nuclear power produces, at present, roughly one third as much carbon dioxide as the delivery of the same quantity of electricity from natural gas...17 ... or, rather, it would do so, if the full energy cost of producing electricity from uranium were counted in – including the energy cost of all the waste-disposal commitments (chapter 2). Unfortunately (in part because of the need to allow high-level waste to cool off) that is not the case. Nuclear waste-disposal is being postponed until a later date. This means that the carbon emissions associated with nuclear energy look rather good at the moment: at about 60 grams per kWh they are approximately 16 percent of the emissions produced by gas-powered electricity generation. The catch is that this figure roughly doubles when the energy-cost of waste-disposal is taken into account, and it grows relentlessly as the industry is forced to turn to lower-grade ores. What lies ahead is the prospect of the remaining ores being of such poor quality that the gas and other fossil fuels used in the nuclear life-cycle would produce less carbon dioxide per kilowatt-hour if they were used directly as fuels to generate electricity.18 Carbon dioxide is not the only greenhouse gas released by the nuclear industry. The conversion of one tonne of uranium into an enriched form requires the addition of about half a tonne of fluorine, producing uranium hexafluoride gas (hex) to be used in the centrifuge process. At the end of the process, only the enriched fraction of the gas is actually used in the reactor: the remainder, depleted hex, is left as waste. Not all of this gas can by any means be prevented from escaping into the atmosphere, and most of it will eventually do so unless it is packed into secure containers and finally buried in deep repositories.19 It is worth remembering here, first, that to supply enough enriched fuel for a standard 1GW (1 gigawatt = 1 billion watts) reactor for one full power year, about 200 tons of natural uranium has to be processed. Secondly, hex is a halogenated compound (HC), one of several that are used at various stages of the cycle. HCs are potent greenhouse gases. The global warming potential of freon-114, for instance, is nearly 10,000 times greater than that of the same mass of carbon dioxide.20 There is no published data on releases of HCs from nuclear energy. There must be a suspicion that they reduce any advantage over fossil fuels which the nuclear power industry enjoys at present in the production of greenhouse gases. Given the unfounded but popular presumption that nuclear energy is carbon-free, it would be helpful if a reliable study of all releases of greenhouse gases from the nuclear fuel cycle, and their effect on the atmosphere, were commissioned and published without delay. Both the quantity of greenhouse gases released by nuclear energy per kilowatt hour and the net energy return of the nuclear industry are determined. primarily by the quality (grade) of uranium ore that is being used. The lower the grade of ore, the more energy is needed to mine and mill it and to deal with the larger quantity of tailings. The limit, in theory, is reached with an ore grade of about 0.01 percent for soft rocks such as sandstone, and 0.02 percent for hard rocks such as granite. If grades lower than those limits were to be used, more carbon dioxide per kilowatt hour would be produced by the nuclear cycle than by the same amount of energy produced from gas. The energy return on energy invested (EREI) would be less than the energy return you would get if you generated the electricity directly in a gas turbine.29 But these are only “theoretical” limits, because in practice the turning point to a negative energy return may be substantially sooner than that. There are five key reasons why ore which is theoretically rich enough to give a positive EREI may in fact not be rich enough to justify exploitation, Deep deposits. Deposits at great depth, requiring the removal of massive overburden, or the development of very deep underground mines, require more energy to mine the resource than is required by the shallower mines now being exploited. It is virtually certain that all uranium deposits near the surface have already been discovered, so any deposits discovered in the future will be deep Water. You can have too little water (it is needed as part of the process of deriving uranium oxide from the ore) or too much (it can cause flooding). Some of the more promising mines have big water problems A trivial contribution. If the EREI of an energy project is only slightly positive, the problem is that you get so little energy back that it can never make a useful contribution to meeting demand: even with a vast industry and inputs of resources and land, you still cannot derive energy in useful amounts.  An investment that may not be available. The poorer ores of the future will have to be derived from extremely large mines, which will require many years of investment before they produce any payback at all. There has to be some doubt as to whether, in the difficult years following the oil peak, that scale of long-term financial investment will be available. This is particularly doubtful in view of the fact that nuclear energy is really suitable only for centralized electricity grids – which are likely to become increasingly obsolete in the future as supplies of natural gas (for generating grid electricity) become scarce and less reliable, and as the cost-effective alternative of improving energy efficiency locally is advanced with all speed under pressure of need. Local geological conditions. Practical local difficulties, such as flooding, can be expected to increase as deeper and more remote mines are exploited. What all of this means is that an energy source – such as uranium ore – ceases to be useful well before it actually reaches the point where the theoretical return on energy invested – TREI – turns negative. It is the practical return on energy invested – PREI – that matters. So, where does the practical turning point lie, below which the ore quality is too poor to be useful? We know that this varies with local conditions; we know that uranium ores as poor as 0.03 percent are being mined now – but only as a by-product in mines being exploited with other minerals; we know that this will be a matter of perpetual debate; and we know that the average ore grade being worked worldwide is at present about 0.15 percent.33 But for a worldwide average above which uranium ore can still provide a positive PREI, a suggested guideline is no lower than 0.1 percent. So – how much uranium ore with a positive PREI do we have left? The “Red Book” is the most authoritative source on the quantity and quality of the remaining uranium ore, and of future prospects for production. It is prepared by the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) in partnership with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and the 2005 edition was published in June 2006.35 In its discussion of the availability of usable uranium ore, it suggests that there is 70 years’ supply at the current price.36 It adds, however, that, when “prognosticated and speculative” resources are added in, there is enough to maintain current output for a further 270 years. Storm van Leeuwen and Smith acknowledge that there is more uranium ore to be discovered, and that there are massive quantities of uranium in the ground, but argue that the quality of the ore remaining after 60 years of further extraction is likely to be too poor to yield a positive TREI.38 We have, then, two rather similar estimates – 70 years and 60 years – but one of them then adds prognosticated and speculative reserves to give us 270 years supply at current rates; the other sees no evidence that the prognosticated and speculative reserves would in fact give us a positive TREI. Does this leave us in total confusion as to which to believe? Not quite. As we know, from experience of the parallel case of peak oil, the official agencies – in the case of oil, the United States Geological Survey and the International Energy Agency – have a strong and now widely acknowledged tendency for massive bias towards exaggerating future prospects. 39 Prognosticated and speculative reserves, if they exist, will be deep below the surface, requiring very large investments of time, capital and energy before they can be exploited. Those speculative resources – which the NEA hopes will one day becomes usable reserves – will need to be remarkably rich, relative to the vast deposits of very low-grade and useless ore of which we are already aware. That is, we know enough to err on the safe side and stick to the demonstrable 60-70-year estimate of remaining ore with a positive TREI, on which the NEA and Storm van Leeuwen and Smith are agreed... ... and yet, let us look again at what that 60/70-year estimate really means. Both the NEA and the Storm van Leeuwen and Smith estimates contain assumptions which tend to exaggerate the time remaining before depletion. First, both estimates are “reserves-to-production ratios” – current reserves simply divided by current annual production, which gives the misleading impression that production can continue at a constant rate before coming to an abrupt stop. In fact, it is well understood that, after reaching a peak well before the artificial cut-off point given by the reserves-to-production ratio, production of a resource in its latter years takes its time to decline towards zero; it is in the years closely following the peak that the trouble starts, not in the year when production finally comes to a stop. Secondly, the growth in demand for uranium which the nuclear industry seems to expect would, in any case, foreshorten the whole sequence: if 70 years is a relevant guideline for the creation of reserves if usage remains constant, a likely cut-off point on the assumption of increasing demand is probably closer to 35 years. Thirdly, both estimates are of the TREI limits, not the much earlier turning-point to negative PREI. These three factors bring forward the period during which deep deficits in uranium supply can be expected, to the decade 2011-2020. And, indeed, there is a widely-shared recognition that there will be a severe shortage of uranium around 2013. This is frankly acknowledged by the NEA itself, and set in context by the First Uranium Corporation.40 Here are the reasons (remember that the numbers are approximations). At present, about 65,000 tons of natural uranium are consumed each year in nuclear reactors worldwide.41 The number of reactors in existence in 2013 will be the product of (1) retirements of old reactors and (2) startups of new ones. There is no basis for a reliable estimate of what that net number will be, so we will assume that there is no change from the present.42 About 40,000 tons of this total demand of 65,000 tons are supplied from uranium mines, which leaves the remaining 25,000 tons to be supplied from other sources.43 10,000 tons comes from “military uranium” – that is, from the highly-enriched uranium salvaged from nuclear weapons, chiefly from the arsenal which the Soviet Union built up during the Cold War, and which is now being dismantled with the help of subsidies from the United States. The remaining 15,000 tons comes from a range of “secondary supplies”, consisting of inventories of uranium fuel that have been built up in the past, together with recycled mine tailings and some mixed-oxide fuel (MOX), a mixture of recycled plutonium and depleted uranium.44 The expectation is that neither of these crucial supplements to mined uranium have much longer to last. Military uranium is being depleted rapidly. At present, it is sold to the United States by Russia on a supply contract which expires in 2013. It is a blend of highly-enriched uranium (HEU) and low-enriched uranium (LEU), and it is supplied in the form of uranium hexafluoride. The deal is attractive to the United States, which not only gets an invaluable supply of nuclear fuel, but does not have to worry about disposing of the waste that arises in the enrichment process; it is, however, becoming less attractive to Russia, which needs all the fuel it can get for its own expanding nuclear program, and Russia is in any case getting towards to the end of her supply of obsolete nuclear warheads. There is no chance of the contract being renewed beyond 2013.45 Secondary supplies are also in decline. The inventories are approaching exhaustion, and this has been one of the drivers of the recent sharp rise in the price of uranium.46 The amount of uranium derived from tailings has been falling, and it has been calculated that the scale of the task of increasing production of uranium-235 now would require arrays of continuously-operating gas centrifuge plants running into the millions.47 The supply of MOX fuel, derived from a reprocessing which is already at its practical limits, is not expected to increase. Although several of the medium-sized producers have in recent years roughly maintained their output, or slightly increased it – notably Kazakhstan, Namibia, Niger and Russia – the world’s two largest producers – Canada and Australia – both show some evidence of being in  recent decline, with uranium production falling by (respectively), 15 and 20 percent in 2005-2006.50 In both cases, hopes for expanding production have been pinned on major new projects – the new Cigar Lake mine in Canada, and the expansion of Olympic Dam in Australia. Cigar Lake is designed to produce nearly 7,000 tons per annum, and it was due to start in 2007. However, in October 2006, it flooded; the probable way of containing the water in the sandstone above the workings is by refrigeration, which will require large inputs of energy even before work can begin. It is now uncertain whether, even after long past and future delays, Cigar Lake will ever be a substantial source of uranium.51 The contribution of Olympic Dam is in some ways even more dubious. At present, it is an underground mine well past its maturity, and the management, BHP Billiton, is considering whether to move to an adjacent ore body with an open pit mine on a massive scale. The new mine would be three kilometers in diameter and one kilometer deep, with some 350 metres of rock overburden to be removed in order to get at the ore. The problem is that the uranium ore is very low-grade – only 0.06 percent and less, with an average of 0.029 percent, so that it would be uneconomic in money terms if it were not for the copper, gold and silver which the rock also contains. But that itself is a mixed blessing because it means that the copper is contaminated with small quantities of uranium, which has to be removed in a smelter constructed in the Australian desert, adding even greater energy-costs to the final energy yield.52 Doubts as to whether Olympic Dam is capable of yielding uranium with a positive energy balance are increased by a recent study by Storm van Leeuwen, who suggests that the energy return on the energy invested in the mine is only marginally better than that of gas. Moreover, the removal of 350 metres of overburden, followed by the milling of low-grade ore would require Australia to import diesel oil with an energy content not far short of the final energy-yield of the uranium it would produce. High oil prices, aggravated by actual outages in oil supplies as the effects of the oil peak mature, would cause problems for a project for which a large and reliable flow of diesel would have to be guaranteed. Moreover, the mine is in an area of extreme drought: even if it does supply its own water by desalinating seawater, it is possible that the needs of agriculture will have a prior claim on South Australia’s water resources.53 The BHP Billiton board has not yet made the final decision whether to go ahead, but the independent nuclear energy analyst John Busby concludes that it is “unlikely”, and that, even if it did, uranium production would “certainly” be closer to 5,000 tons per annum than to the 15,000 tons which was originally planned.54 On this evidence is seems probable that, far from expanding in order to sustain the flow of energy following the oil peak, the nuclear industry will indeed begin to falter during the decade 2010-2019, with some nuclear reactors being closed down for lack of fuel, and some of the reactors now in the planning stage and under construction remaining unused indefinitely. In the light of this, a judgment has to be made as to whether hopes of a revival of uranium supply are a sufficiently realistic foundation on which to base expectations that the nuclear industry has a long-term future as a major energy provider. Even the NEA hedges its bets about this. Readers are invited to read the following two sentences from the Executive Summary with care and to decide for themselves whether they are reassured that the uranium needed to fuel the industry’s recovery after the coming shortfall will in fact be available: The long lead-times needed to bring resources into production continues to underscore the importance of making timely decisions to increase production capability well in advance of any supply shortfall. Improved information on the nature and extent of world uranium inventories and other secondary sources would improve the accuracy of the forecasting required to make these timely production decisions.55 And this brings us to the critical question of whether there will be enough uranium to provide the energy to clear up the nuclear industry’s own accumulated waste. Can the industry supply the energy to clear its own waste? First of all, we need some definitions. We can define the “net” energy produced by the nuclear industry as the electricity generated minus “front-end” energy – the energy needed to build reactors, to mine, mill, enrich and prepare the fuel, and to carry out all the other energy-using tasks needed to produce nuclear energy. “Back-end” energy – the energy needed to clear up all the wastes produced at each stage of the front-end processes, including the disposal of old reactors – is of two kinds: (1) the energy needed to dispose of the new waste – that is, the waste produced in the future, and (2) the energy needed to dispose of the whole backlog which has accumulated since the nuclear industry started-up in the 1950s. Back-end energy is the combined total of both of these.56 Most of the energy needed for these front-end and back-end processes actually comes from derivatives of fossil fuels such as diesel oil to power mining and milling machines, and coal or gas to make steel and concrete. But it is the total energy balance that matters, not the question of which source of energy will be needed for any particular part of the nuclear cycle, so it makes sense to think of all the front-end and back-end energy needs as if they were supplied from nuclear electricity. This means that some of the energy produced by nuclear reactors will not actually be available for sale because it will be required for those processes. To keep the explanation simple and in round numbers, we will use the estimate that the industry has another 60 years during which it could in practice sustain current rates of extraction, getting more energy out of the entire process than it puts into it – a positive PREI. Remember that, for reasons explained above, this is an optimistic estimate, and the implications of other estimates will be discussed in chapter 6. But, for now, let us call 60 years the “nominal” estimate and use it to help us concentrate on the principles: The first question to ask is, “How long would the industry be able to sustain its current output if the front-end energy costs had to be met out of the electricity generated by nuclear reactors?” Well, this varies with circumstances but, as an approximate guideline, the front-end processes require about one quarter of the gross energy output of nuclear reactors, so the answer to this question is: three quarters of 60 years – that is, about 45 years.57 Now we come to the back-end processes: the energy cost of disposing of the 60 years-worth of new waste is approximately the same as that of the front end – that is, about one quarter of the gross output, or 15 years of energy supply, so that brings the supply of available energy down to 30 years. But then there is still the backlog – the 60 years-worth of waste produced since 1950, and dealing with this will this require yet another 15 years of energy supply. That brings us finally down to the amount of energy we have available for use in the grid: 15 years. In other words, even if the industry really had 60 years’ supply of uranium left for its use, it would only have some fifteen years left before the decisive moment; from that turning-point, its entire net output of energy would have to be used for the essential task of getting rid of its stockpile of wastes, plus the wastes produced in the future.58 If, in its attempt to supply as much energy as possible, the industry were to postpone the task for more than that fifteen years, it would become energy-bankrupt: it would owe more energy to the planet than it could generate: it would never be able to produce enough net energy to dispose of its life-time waste. This means that, even if the nominal estimate of 60 years were correct, the industry would face a turning-point to energy bankruptcy in about 2025. The task of clearing up the remaining waste – the alternative to converting the planet into an open-plan waste-dump – is non-negotiable. The time we have left in which to do it depends on how much uranium with a positive PREI remains – and the short time we have left, even if there is as much as sixty years’ supply remaining, is set in context with other estimates, both shorter and longer, in chapter 6. Meanwhile, we should not forget the money-cost of this. If the nuclear industry in the second half of its nominal 120-year whole-life span (1950-2070) were to commit itself (as it must) to the cost of clearing up its current and future waste, any electricity left over and available for sale would become exceedingly expensive, and the industry would soon reach the point at which it had no spare energy to sell anyway. Meanwhile, governments will have to keep the clear-up program going well into the future, whatever the other priorities. They will probably have to buy-in much of the needed net energy from other sources, at which point, of course, the industry will change from being a net supplier of energy to being a net consumer. And yet, in an energy-strapped society, the non-nuclear energy needed to dispose of the nuclear industry’s legacy will be hard to find. The prospect is opening up of massive stocks of unstable wastes which – since the energy is lacking – are impossible to clear up. Nuclear energy is therefore caught in a depletion trap – the depletion of rich uranium ore, on a timescale similar to that of oil and gas. So, the question to be asked is: as the conventional uranium sources run low, are there alternative sources of fuel for nuclear energy? At this point, the natural thing to do is to turn to James Lovelock’s robust dismissal of the idea that the growth of nuclear power is likely to be constrained by depletion of its raw material. This is how he deals with it: Another flawed idea now circulating is that the world supply of uranium is so small that its use for energy would last only a few years. It is true that if the whole world chose to use uranium as its sole fuel, supplies of easily mined uranium would soon be exhausted. But there is a superabundance of low-grade uranium ore: most granite, for example, contains enough uranium to make its fuel capacity five times that of an equal mass of coal. India is already preparing to use its abundant supplies of thorium, an alternative fuel, in place of uranium.59 Lovelock also urges that we have a readily-available stock of fuel in the plutonium that has been accumulated from the reactors that are shortly to be decommissioned. And he might have added that other candidates as sources of nuclear fuel are seawater and phosphates. So, if we put the supposed alternatives to uranium ore in order, this is what we have: (1) granite; (2) fast-breeder reactors using (a) plutonium and (b) thorium; (3) seawater; and (4) phosphates. Granite It has already been explained above that granite with a uranium content of less than 0.02 percent cannot be used as a source of nuclear energy, because that is the borderline at which the energy needed to sustain the whole nuclear energy life-cycle is greater – and in the case of even poorer ores, much greater – than the energy that comes back. But Lovelock is so insistent and confident on this point that it is worth revisiting. Storm van Leeuwen, basing his calculations on his joint published work with Smith, considers how much granite would be needed to supply a 1 GW nuclear reactor with the 200 tons of natural uranium needed as a fuel source for a year’s full-power electricity production. Ordinary granite contains roughly four grams of uranium per tonne of granite (4 ppm or 0.0004 percent). One year’s supply of uranium extracted from this granite would require 100 million tons of granite (assuming, very optimistically, that you can get the granite to yield as much as half the uranium it contains). So, Lovelock’s granite could indeed be used to provide power for a nuclear reactor, but there are snags. The minor one is that it would leave a heap of granite tailings (if neatly stacked) 100 metres high, 100 metres wide and 4 kilometers long. The major snag is that the extraction process would require some 650 PJ (a petajoule = 1,000,000 billion joules) energy to produce the 26 PJ electricity provided by the reactor. That is, the process would use up some 25 times more energy that the reactor produced.60 As for the comparison between granite and coal: well, a 1 GW coal-fired power station needs about 2 million tons of coal to keep it going for a year, compared with 100 million tons of granite. Far from the practically-available fuel capacity of a tonne of granite being five times that of a tonne coal, it is 50 times less. Lovelock’s calculation is adrift by a multiple of around 250. Fast breeder reactors (a) Plutonium Lovelock’s proposal that we should use plutonium as the fuel for the nuclear power stations of the future can be taken in either of two ways. He might be suggesting that we could simply run the reactors on plutonium on the conventional “once-through” system which is standard, using light-water reactors. It is debatable whether this can be done; it has never been attempted, and it would involve a significantly different process, including the use of a different moderator. A more plausible approach would be to use it in some kind of combination with uranium – but then it is not solving the problem of uranium becoming scarce, and the very small contribution (2 per cent) which has been successfully reprocessed from spent fuel into mixed oxides (MOX) shows that this is not going to be a replacement for uranium. There are about 240 tons of plutonium in the world held in stock for civilian use. In principle, this could be increased from two sources; (a) the ex-weapons plutonium (about 150-200 tons); and (b) from the plutonium in spent fuel – but the problem here is that extracting it adds yet another layer of difficulty to the aim of a smoothly-running commercial operation for fast-breeders. The UK’s extraction plant, Thorp, has closed down after a massive leak and is unlikely to be reopened; extraction of plutonium is done to some extent in France, Russia, Japan and India, but it is such a tricky process that the United States has made it illegal.61 But breeding is a potentially attractive technology. Let us suppose, then, that the best estimate for the amount of available plutonium in the world is 240 tons, and that there is enough uranium or MOX around to use it in reactors. You don’t get many functioning reactors for that. The UK’s stocks of 106 tons, along with MOX, would be enough to fuel just two reactors for their lifetime (so there would be enough for four reactors worldwide). Then, at the end of their life (say, 24 full-power years), the plutonium would have been used up; they would then be closed down and not replaced, because at that time there will be no uranium left to fuel them, apart perhaps from very small quantities of MOX. This would scarcely be a useful strategy, so it is more sensible to suppose that Lovelock has in mind the second possibility: that the plutonium reactors should be breeder reactors, designed not just to produce electricity now, but to breed more plutonium for the future. Breeders are in principle a very attractive technology. In uranium ore, a mere 0.7 percent of the uranium content consists of the useful isotope – the one that is fissile and produces energy – uranium-235. Most of the rest consists of uranium-238, and most of that simply gets in the way and has to be dumped at the end; it is uranium-238 which is responsible for much of the awesome mixture of radioactive materials that causes the waste problem. And yet, uranium-238, as we saw in the introduction, also has the property of being fertile. When bombarded by neutrons from a “start-up” fuel like uranium-235 or plutonium-239, it can absorb a neutron to become uranium-239, which quickly decays to neptunium-239 and then to plutonium-239. This means that plutonium-239 can be used as a start-up fuel to breed more plutonium-239, more-or-less indefinitely. That’s where the claim that nuclear power would one day be too cheap to meter comes from. The Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) suggest that if all available sources of ore are exploited, and fast-breeder reactors perfected and developed, we may look forward to 20,000 years of nuclear energy at current rates of output.62 But there is a catch. It is a complicated technology. It consists of three operations: breeding, reprocessing and fuel fabrication, all of which have to work concurrently and smoothly. First, breeding: this does not simply convert uranium-238 to plutonium239; at the same time, it breeds plutonium-241, americium, curium, rhodium, technetium, palladium and much else. This fiercely radioactive mixture tends to clog up and corrode the equipment. There are in principle ways round these problems, but a smoothly-running breeding process on a commercial scale has never yet been achieved.63 Secondly, reprocessing. The mixture of radioactive products that comes out of the breeding process has to be sorted, with the plutonium-239 being extracted. The mixture itself is highly radioactive, and tends to degrade the solvent, tributyl phosphate. Here, too, insoluble compounds form, clogging up the equipment; there is some debate about how great the danger is of plutonium accumulating into a critical mass, and setting off a nuclear explosion. The mixture gets hot and releases radioactive gases; and significant quantities of the plutonium and uranium are lost as waste. As in the case of the breeder operation itself, smoothly-running reprocessing on a commercial scale has never yet been achieved. The third operation is to fabricate the recovered plutonium as fuel. The mixture gives off a great deal of gamma and alpha radiation, so the whole process of forming the fuel into rods which can then be put back into a reactor has to be done by remote control. This, too, has yet to be achieved as a smoothly-running commercial operation. And, of course, it follows that the whole fast-breeder cycle, consisting of three processes none of which have ever worked as intended, has itself never worked. There are three fast-breeder reactors in the world: Beloyarsk-3 in Russia, Monju in Japan and Phénix in France; Monju and Phénix have long been out of operation; Beloyarsk is still operating, but it has never bred. But let us look on the bright side of all this. Suppose that, with 30 years of intensive research and development, the world’s nuclear energy industry could find a use for all the reactor-grade plutonium in existence, and fabricate it into fuel rods. You can see straight away how seductive this technology is because when plutonium is used in fast breeders, wrapped in large “blankets” of uranium-238, you need (in theory) just three tons of plutonium to drive the process along, so you could (in theory) start up 80 fast-breeder reactors at the same time. So, they start breeding in 2035. But the process is not as fast as the name suggests (“fast” refers to the speeds needed at the subatomic level, rather than the speed of the process), and the outcome is by no means certain; but let us give the technology the benefit of the doubt: everything goes according to plan. Forty years later, each breeder reactor would have bred enough plutonium to replace itself and to start up another one. With the benefit of these magical assumptions becoming reality, by 2075 – long after reaching the depths of the coming energy famine – we would have 160 breeder reactors in place worldwide (there are 439 nuclear reactors in operation now). And that is all we would have, because the ordinary, uranium-235-based reactors would by then be out of fuel. Thorium The other way of breeding fuel is to use thorium. Thorium is a metal found in most rocks and soils, and there are some rich ores bearing as much as 10 percent thorium oxide. The relevant isotope is the slightly radioactive thorium-232. It has a half-life three times that of the earth, so that makes it useless as a direct source of energy, but it can be used as the starting-point from which to breed an efficient nuclear fuel. Here’s how: o Start by irradiating the thorium-232, using a start-up fuel – plutonium239 will do it. Thorium-232 is slightly fertile, and absorbs a neutron to become thorium-233.  The thorium-233, with a half-life of 22.2 minutes, decays to protactinium-233. The protactinium-233, with a half-life of 27 days, decays into uranium233. The uranium-233 is highly fissile, and can be used not just as nuclear fuel, but as the start-up source of irradiation for a blanket of thorium 232, to keep the whole cycle going indefinitely. 66 But, as is so often the case with nuclear power, it is not as good as it looks. The two-step sequence of plutonium-breeding is, as we have seen, hard enough. The four-step sequence of thorium-breeding is worse. The uranium-233 which you get at the end of the process is contaminated with uranium-232 and with highly-radioactive thorium-228, both of which are neutron-emitters, reducing its effectiveness as a fuel; it also has the disadvantage that it can be used in nuclear weapons. The comparatively long half-life of protactinium-233 (27 days) makes for problems in the reactor, since substantial quantities linger on for up to a year. Some reactors – including Kakrapar-1 and -2 in India – have both achieved full power using some thorium in their operation, and it may well be that, if there is to be a very long-term future for nuclear fission, it will be thorium that drives it along. And yet, the full thorium breeding cycle, working on a scale which is large-enough and reliable-enough to be commercial, is a long way away. 232, to keep the whole cycle going indefinitely. 66 But, as is so often the case with nuclear power, it is not as good as it looks. The two-step sequence of plutonium-breeding is, as we have seen, hard enough. The four-step sequence of thorium-breeding is worse. The uranium-233 which you get at the end of the process is contaminated with uranium-232 and with highly-radioactive thorium-228, both of which are neutron-emitters, reducing its effectiveness as a fuel; it also has the disadvantage that it can be used in nuclear weapons. The comparatively long half-life of protactinium-233 (27 days) makes for problems in the reactor, since substantial quantities linger on for up to a year. Some reactors – including Kakrapar-1 and -2 in India – have both achieved full power using some thorium in their operation, and it may well be that, if there is to be a very long-term future for nuclear fission, it will be thorium that drives it along. And yet, the full thorium breeding cycle, working on a scale which is large-enough and reliable-enough to be commercial, is a long way away. And even if that day does come, its contribution, for the foreseeable future, will be tiny. This is because it has to begin with some start-up fuel – a source of neutrons to get the whole thing going. That could come in any of three forms. It could come from uranium-235, which is going to be scarce, but there could perhaps be a case for using some in a breeder, even if the process for the first generation of reactors used more energy than it generated. Or, it could come from plutonium, but (a) there isn’t very much of that around either; (b) what there is (especially if we are going to do what Lovelock urges) is going to be busy as the fuel for once through reactors and/or fast-breeder reactors, as explained above; and (c) it is advisable, wherever there is an alternative, to keep plutonium-239 and uranium-233 – an unpredictable mixture – as separate as possible. The third, and ideal, option is uranium-233, the final fuel produced by the thorium cycle, but the problem here is that it doesn’t exist until the cycle is complete, so it can’t be used to start it. But let’s suppose that enough uranium-235 or plutonium-239 were made available to provide a full load for one reactor and to keep it going for its lifetime. There is no good foundation for forecasting the rate of growth but, taking account of all the assumptions about technical solutions that are intrinsic to this subject, there is the possibility that by 2075 there could be two thorium-cycle breeder reactors delivering energy to the grid Seawater contains uranium in a concentration of about thirty parts per billion, and advocates of nuclear power are right to say that, if this could be used, then nuclear power could in principle supply us with the energy we need for a long time to come. Ways of extracting those minute quantities of uranium from seawater and concentrating them into uranium oxide have been worked out in some detail. First of all, uranium ions are attracted – “adsorbed” – onto adsorption beds consisting of a suitable material such as titanium hydroxide, and there are also some polymers with the right properties. These beds must be suspended in the sea in huge arrays, many kilometers in length, in places where there is a current to wash the seawater through them, and where the sea is sufficiently warm – at least 20°C. They must then be lifted out of the sea and taken on-shore, where, in the first stage of the process, they are cleansed to remove organic materials and organisms. Stage two consists of “desorption” – separating the adsorbed uranium ions from the beds. Thirdly, the solution that results from this must be purified, removing the other compounds that have accumulated in much higher concentration than the uranium ions. Fourthly, the solution is concentrated, and fifthly, a solvent is used to extract the uranium. The sixth stage is to concentrate the uranium and purify it into uranium oxide (yellowcake), ready for enrichment in the usual way.69 But the operation is massive and takes a lot of energy. Very roughly, two cubic kilometers of sea water is needed to yield enough natural uranium to supply one ton of fuel, prepared and ready for action in a reactor. A 1 GW reactor needs about 200 tons of natural uranium for one full power year, so each reactor would require some 400 cubic kilometers of seawater to be processed – that is 40,000 cubic kilometers of seawater being processed in order to keep a useful fleet of 100 nuclear reactors in business for one (full-power) year.70 And what is the energy balance of all this? One tonne of natural uranium is needed to produce to produce approximately 160 TJ (1 terajoule = 1,000 billion joules), less the energy costs of the front-end processes (defined in chapter 3) – giving a net electricity yield of some 120 TJ, while the back-end processes have to come out of that. The energy needed to supply the uranium from seawater, ready for entry into that fuel cycle, is in the region of 195-250 TJ, so that the use of seawater as a source of energy would require more energy than it could produce. The claims for phosphates as a source of uranium are impressive. The Red Book published by the NEA and the IAEA concludes that, by including phosphates as a uranium source, their already high estimate for the supply of uranium, including prognosticated resources (275 years at current rates) could be more than doubled to 675 years.71 The first thing to note is that the process of extraction is difficult. The phosphate ores are used to produce phosphoric acid, which is then concentrated in uranium, a process which requires solvents including toxic organophosphate compounds, and produces organofluorophosphorus and greenhouse gases in the form of fluorohydrocarbons.72 And then there is the even deeper problem of supply. Phosphates are, at best, a poor source of uranium. The largest deposits contain uranium ore concentrations of between 0.007 percent and 0.023 percent; they average around 0.01 percent.73 That is to say, this is a low-grade uranium ore, giving a negative PREI. Moreover, there is now increasing concern that the production of phosphates, which are an essential requirement for agriculture too, is close to its peak, and is poised for the decline characteristic of a depleting resource.74 The ultimate, iconic error for a society in trouble is to “eat its seed corn”. The evidence so far suggests that the use of phosphates as a source of the uranium for nuclear fuel would be like burning it. If we bring the above brief review of alternative sources of uranium together with the analysis of chapter 3, it is reasonable to conclude that, even if the nuclear industry presented no other problems, “peak uranium” would rule out the prospect of the nuclear industry being in any way an answer to “peak oil”, and to scarcities of gas and coal. It is now decision-time for many nations confronting the fierce certainty of climate change, the depletion of oil and gas, and the ageing of their nuclear reactors. Why should the decision-makers take any notice of this analysis, written from a global perspective? Well, one of the problems is that it is not a decision that can be made in isolation. Nuclear power could in theory be sustained by a few individual nations: they could perhaps export their wastes, and reduced competition for rich ores would mean that the supply of uranium could be spun out for a long time. So, for an individual nation looking at the choice in isolation, the nuclear option may seem to be attractive. But there is a “fallacy of composition” here: an option that is available to one cannot be supposed to be available to many; on the contrary, it is only available to the one because it is not adopted by many – and if it is adopted by many, then everyone is in trouble, deep trouble. The priority for the nuclear industry now should be to use the electricity generated by nuclear power to clean up its own pollution and to phase itself out before events force it to close down abruptly. Contrary to what you might think, given the huge scale of its problems and its supposed status as a fallback position which could solve our energy problems the nuclear energy industry is small, providing a mere 2½ percent of the world’s final energy demand.75 Nuclear power is not a solution to the energy famine brought on by the decline of oil and gas. Nor is it a means of reducing emissions of greenhouse gases. It cannot provide energy solutions, however much we may want it to do so. But the conclusion that the nuclear industry cannot provide the energy we need over the next three or four decades means that we have a problem. An energy gap lies before us, for two reasons. First the damage done to the self-regulating systems of the climate is already so great that we are at or near the tipping point at which global heating will get out of control, moving relentlessly but quickly towards a new equilibrium state possibly lethal to the majority of the inhabitants of the planet and to its civilizations. Secondly, we are at or near the "oil peak" at which supplies of oil and (slightly later) gas will turn down into a relentless decline with consequences on a scale comparable to those of climate change. In this situation, we have little choice. If there is any energy source at all which could operate on the scale and in the time needed to fill this energy gap, then we must take it, even if it comes with enormous disadvantages. Nuclear energy certainly has disadvantages, quite apart from the clincher problem of the depletion of its fuel. It is a source of low-level radiation which may be more dangerous than was previously thought. It is a source of high-level waste which has to be sequestered. Every stage in the process produces lethal waste, including the mining and leaching processes, the milling, the enrichment and the decommissioning. It is very expensive. It is a terrorist target and its enrichment processes are stepping stones to the production of nuclear weapons.76 And yet, so great is the need for some way of closing-off the demand for fossil fuels and filling the energy gap, and so serious are the consequences of not doing so, that Lovelock can argue that it would be better to develop nuclear energy, even with these disadvantages, than to fail to stop carbon emissions – or else fall into the energy gap and take the consequences. Lovelock writes: “We need emission-free energy sources immediately, and there is no serious contender to nuclear fission”.77 He suggests that the decision is much clarified for us if we recognize the risk of climate change for what it is, and he adds that we will not succeed in doing this if we do not in the process move beyond the intellectual analysis and, instead, feel the fear: Few, even among climate scientists and ecologists, seem yet to realize fully the potential severity, or the imminence, of catastrophic global disaster; understanding is still in the conscious mind alone and not yet the visceral reaction of fear. We lack an intuitive sense, an instinct, that tells us when Gaia is in danger.78 Lovelock’s argument is persuasive. But there are three grounds on which it is open to criticism. The nuclear fuel cycle Uranium depletion is not a “flawed idea”; it is a reality that is just a little way ahead. Lovelock’s otherwise brilliant analysis of climate change displays no knowledge of the nuclear fuel-cycle. His optimism about the feasibility of nuclear power in the future is a case of whistling in the dark. Alternative energy strategies Lovelock may underestimate the potential of the fourfold strategy which can be described as “Lean Energy”, an application of “lean thinking” – perceptive intelligence applied to systems. It consists of four aims: (1) Energy efficiency: to achieve the decisive improvements in the efficiency of energy-services made possible by the conservation and energy-saving technologies. (2) The proximity principle: to develop the potential for local provision of energy, goods and services. This major structural change, reducing the transport-dependency of goods, people and electricity, is difficult but necessary. It is achievable only incrementally, building local competence across the whole range of economics and culture. Deep reductions in travel and transport can be expected to come about rapidly and brutally as the oil market breaks down; adapting to them – and crucially, preparing for them before the event – will take longer. (3) Renewable energy: to design and build renewable energy systems to match the needs and resources of the particular place and site. (4) Tradable Energy Quotas (TEQs): to define a secure energy budget for the whole economy, involving every energy-user in the common purpose of achieving deep reductions in energy demand.79 It cannot be expected that this strategy will fill the energy gap completely, or neatly, or in time, but nor is Lovelock suggesting that nuclear energy could do so. Even if there were neither a uranium-supply problem to restrain the use of nuclear energy, nor a waste-problem, and even if it were the overriding priority for governments around the world, nuclear energy would still fall far short of filling the gap. It would be impossible to build all the nuclear power stations needed in time, and the energy required for construction and for building the mining-milling enrichment-transport systems would mean that a rapidly-growing nuclear energy industry would be using more energy than it provided throughout most of its period of growth – the more rapid the growth, the deeper the energy deficit it would cause. There are good reasons to believe that Lean Energy could do better. It would start to get results immediately. Per unit of energy-services produced, it would be about ten times cheaper. It would be flexible and sensitive to detail, making the best possible use of local conditions, skills and ingenuity. It would be able to call on the skill and cooperation of the entire population. And it would be part of an environmental and practical evolution towards reduced transport, environmental protection and strengthened local economics all coming together in a joined-up program. The oil peak Lovelock does not give enough weight to the significance of the oil peak. As this weigh in, it will establish conditions in which there is no choice but to conserve energy, whether the urgency of climate change is recognized or not. Without the oil peak to concentrate the mind, action to save the climate could be leisurely at best. With the oil peak reminding us, by repeatedly turning out the lights and stopping us filling up our cars, we will have an incentive to follow the one available option of Lean Energy with all the will and determination we can find. What appears to follow from this is a best-of-both-worlds strategy: to develop nuclear energy as far as the uranium supply allows, and at the same time to develop Lean Energy. But the problem is that the two strategies are substantially incompatible. A dash for nuclear energy would reduce the funds and other resources, and the concentrated focus, needed for Lean Energy. Nuclear energy relies on the existence of a fully powered-up grid system into which it can feed its output of electricity – but the grid itself is mainly powered by the electricity from gas-fueled power stations, so that if gas supplies were to be interrupted, the grid would (at least partially) close down, along with the nuclear reactors that feed into it; Lean Energy, on the other hand, is flexibly organized around local minigrids. Nuclear energy inevitably brings a sense of reassurance that, in the end, the technical fix will save us; Lean Energy calls on the whole range of technology from the most advanced to the most labor-intensive, along with adaptations in behavior, in the economy, in the use of land and distance, in the way food is grown and materials are used, and in the sinews and culture of society itself. Nuclear energy’s potential contribution to energy services in the future, starting from its present level of 2½ percent of final energy demand, is small; the potential for Lean Energy is at least twenty times greater. Nuclear energy is about conserving the bankrupt present; Lean Energy is about inventing and building a future that works.80 For these reasons, the best-of-both-worlds strategy of backing both nuclear energy and Lean Energy could be expected to lead to worst-of both-worlds consequences. Lean Energy would be impeded by nuclear energy; nuclear energy would be hopelessly ineffective without Lean Energy. Result: paralysis. This should not be overstated: a few token nuclear reactors to replace some of those that are about to be retired would make it much harder to develop Lean Energy with the single-minded urgency and resources needed, without necessarily ruling out progress towards it entirely. But the defining reality of the energy future has to be an acknowledgment that no large-scale technical fix is available. Energy cannot any longer be delegated to experts. The future will have to be a collective, society-transforming effort. The strategic matters discussed in chapter 5 are important, but it is the waste problem which is decisive. There is a turning-point when the nuclear industry will become energy-bankrupt, if it has not already done so. After that, it will never be able to generate the energy needed for permanent disposal of its backlog of waste, even if it diverts its whole energy output into the task. This prospect needs to be researched urgently and by more than one research centre with the authority to get at the facts, but otherwise working independently of industry or government interests. Research should also, with all speed, get evidence about the global warming and ozone impacts of uranium hexafluoride and other solvents, both in use and as leaking waste. And here is a hypothesis to which we need an answer at some speed: if the worldwide backlog of nuclear wastes were simply left to leak, catch fire and spread into the environment, the resulting levels of radiation and toxicity would in principle require the evacuation of the planet. True, or not? Waste and depletion are two aspects of the same problem. For the timing of depletion, we will consider four estimates, starting with one which suggests that the industry will not recover from the 2011-2020 outages, giving an estimate of 10 years before the industry ceases to be a significant producer of electrical power owing to depletion of uranium giving a positive practical return on energy invested (PREI). The second estimate suggests that the industry does recover from the coming outages and continues as an energy producer at roughly current rates for 30 years. Thirdly, we take the estimate discussed in chapter 3, which has a time horizon of 6o years. Fourthly, let us suppose that this present analysis is completely misguided, and that the industry will continue on its present scale for another 200 years. These estimates are now brought together with the estimates of the net energy yielded by the nuclear industry, after the costs of the front-end processes (procuring the fuel and producing energy from it) and back-end processes (dismantling reactors and dealing with wastes) are taken into account. They are summarized in the Energy Balance Sheet. We have, then, four dates for the turning-point at which the industry will never be able to supply the energy needed to get rid of its own wastes: that is, energy-bankruptcy: 2000, 2010, 2025 and 2095. o If it is 2000, the industry is already deep into its energy-bankruptcy. It will never be able to get rid of its own waste from its own resources. There is the prospect of having to call on the supplies of fossil fuel energy, at a time of deepening scarcity, to deal with the nuclear waste which the waning nuclear industry cannot clear up. If it is 2010, the whole of the energy produced by the industry over its remaining life of 30 years must be directed into clearing up its own wastes, starting now. o If it is 2025, the industry has some fifteen years before the onset of energy bankruptcy. o If it is 2095, we are looking at an industry facing, in 85 years' time, an inheritance 0f waste whose treatment will demand a flow of energy equal to some 115 years of electricity output – and with no electricity left over to sell. In other words, the greater the estimate of remaining reserves, the longer the period of energy debt. In the event of the recklessly optimistic estimate of there being 200 years uranium remaining with a positive PREI, the last 115 years of the nuclear industry’s operation would be committed to paying back its energy debt, dealing with the backlog of wastes, and with the large accumulation of its new wastes accrued during the final 200 years of its life. An energy debt on this scale is scarcely good news. Nor is the financial debt that would go with it. With some justice, the nuclear industry could point out that the task of dealing with its wastes has already started, and that high-level waste has to be allowed to cool off. An experimental deep repository for high-level waste has been excavated in Sweden; Finland has started on a real one at Olkiluoto; plans to build one in Nevada are being debated; and research is being done into ways of dealing with uranium hexafluoride. And yet, the questions of where exactly it will go, who will take responsibility for the waste held in deteriorating stockpiles in unstable regions, how to pay for it and, above all, where the energy will come from, remain unanswered. Meanwhile, the industry continues to add to the problem. And suitable sites – stable, preferably dry, and enjoying the support of the local population – are rare; the vast size of a permanent repository, the technical difficulty, the energy needed and the cost all bring this massive task of long-term disposal to the edge of what is possible. It may in fact never be possible to find a permanent resting-place for all, or even for a decent proportion, of the waste that has already been produced. The nuclear industry should therefore focus on finding solutions to the whole of its waste problem before it becomes too late to do so. And hold it right there, because this is perhaps the moment to think about what “too late” might mean. Notwithstanding the emphasis placed on depletion in this booklet, it is climate change that may well set the final date for completion of the massive and non-negotiable task of dealing with nuclear waste. Many reactors are in low-lying areas in the path of rising seas; and many of the storage ponds, crowded with high-level waste, are close by. Estimated dates for steep rises in sea levels are constantly being brought forward. With an angry climate, and whole populations on the move, it will be hard to find the energy, the funds, the skills and the orderly planning needed for a massive program of waste disposal – or even moving waste out of the way of rising tides. When outages in gas supplies lead to break down in electricity supplies, the electrical-powered cooling systems that stop high-level waste from catching fire will stop working. It will also be hard to stop ragged armies, scrambling for somewhere to live, looting spent fuel rods from unguarded dumps, attaching them to conventional explosives, and being prepared to use them. All this will have to be dealt-with, and at speed. There may be no time to wait for reactor cores and high-level wastes to cool down. But, then, it may be a frank impossibility to bury them until they have cooled down... In any event, the task of making those wastes safe should be an unconditional priority, equal to that of confronting climate change itself. The default-strategy of seeding the world with radioactive time-bombs which will pollute the oceans and detonate at random intervals for thousands of years into the future, whether there are any human beings around to care about it or not, should be recognized as off any scale calibrated in terms other than dementia. Nuclear power is the energy source that claims a significance and causes trouble far beyond the scale of the energy it produces. It is a distraction from the need to face up to the coming energy gap, to inform the public and to call on the wit and energy which is available to develop a program of Lean Energy. Of the many shortcomings in the response to energy-matters, a central one has been the failure to involve the public in doing what it could, given a chance, be good at – inventing solutions and making them happen in realistic local detail. Determined attempts are being made to rectify this (the U.K. Government’s Climate Change Communication Initiative is an example) but the construction of nuclear reactors, presented as almost carbon-free fixes for the energy problem, is not a good way of involving the public. It is only when we are free of such narcotic fallacies that there will be a commitment to the one option for which there is a prospect of success: tapping the energy of the people. We have to integrate energy, economics and society, and to enable them to develop in a way which copes with the reality of the energy gap that is now almost upon us. That calls for an effective framework which makes it clear to all of us – citizens, firms, the government, everyone – what the energy limits are now, and achieves an orderly descent to the low limits that will apply in the future. It is then up to us to bring all the skill, ingenuity and judgment we can to negotiating our way down the energy descent. We need to discover a common purpose. All this is possible if there is an appropriate framework for it, a system in which individual motivations are aligned with the collective need. There are various names for it. One of them is Tradable Energy Quotas (TEQs). We need to enable small-scale actions to build up onto a scale that gets results; we need a robust, simple, system for recruiting ingenuity and intelligence, and the common purpose to make it happen now. Such a design exists. There is a non-nuclear life-cycle ready and waiting. The fuel can now be used to produce heat to raise the steam to generate electricity. In due course the process generates waste in the form of spent fuel elements and, whether these are then reprocessed and re-used or not, eventually they have to be disposed of. But first they must be allowed to cool off in ponds to allow the isotopes to decay to some extent, for between 10 and 100 years – sixty years may be taken as typical. The ponds need a reliable electricity supply to keep them stirred and topped up with water to stop the radioactive fuel elements drying out and catching fire. In due course, these wastes will need to be packed, using remotely-controlled robots, into very secure canisters lined with lead, steel and pure electrolytic copper, in which they must lie buried in giant geological repositories considered to be stable. It may turn out in due course that there is one best solution, but there will never be an ideal way to store waste which will be radioactive for a thousand centuries or more and, whatever option is chosen, it will require a lot of energy. For example, the energy needed over the lifetime of a reactor to manufacture the canisters (each weighing more than ten times as much as the waste they contain), and to make the electrolytic copper, has never been verified, but it is estimated to be about equal to the energy needed to build the reactor in the first place A third, less predictable, form of waste occurs in the form of emissions and catastrophic releases in the event of accident. The nuclear industry has good safety systems in place; it must, because the consequences of an accident are so extreme. However, it is not immune to accident. The work is routine, requiring workers to cope with long periods of tedium punctuated by the unexpected, along with “normality-creep” as anomalies become familiar. The hazards were noted in the mid-1990s by a senior nuclear engineer working for the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission: “I believe in nuclear power but after seeing the NRC in action, I’m convinced a serious accident is not just likely, but inevitable... They’re asleep at the wheel.” Every technology has its accidents; indeed, the Nthe U.S. in a twenty-year period as between 15-45 percent. The risk never goes away; society bears the pain and carries on but, in the case of nuclear power, there is a difference: the consequences of a serious accident – another accident on the scale of Chernobyl, or greater, or much greater – would take nuclear power towards being an uninsurable risk, even with the help of government subsidies for the premiums.15 And a by-product of this – “waste” in the fourth sense – is the plutonium itself which, when isolated and purified in a reprocessing plant, can be brought up to weapons-grade, making it the fuel needed for nuclear proliferation. This is one of three ways in which the industry is the platform from which the proliferation of nuclear weapons can be developed; the second one is by enriching the uranium-235 to around 90 percent, rather than the mere 3.5 percent required by a reactor. The third consists of providing a source of radioactive materials which can be dispersed using conventional Regulatory Commission estimates the probability of meltdown in Nuclear reactors at present have a lifetime of about 30- 40 years, but produce electricity at full power for no more than 24 years; the new European Pressurised Water Reactors (EPR), it is claimed, will last longer. During their lifetimes, reactors have to be maintained and (at least once) thoroughly refurbished; eventually, corrosion and intense radioactivity make them impossible to repair. Eventually, they must be dismantled, but experience of this is limited. As a first step, the fuel elements must be put into storage; the cooling system must be cleaned to reduce radioactive corrosion residuals and unidentified deposits (CRUD). These operations, together, produce about 1,000 m3 of high-level waste. After a cooling-off period which may be as much as 50-100 years, the reactor has to be dismantled and cut into small pieces to be packed in containers for final disposal. The total energy required for decommissioning has been estimated at approximately 50 percent more than the energy needed in the original construction Nuclear reactors at present have a lifetime of about 30- 40 years, but produce electricity at full power for no more than 24 years; the new European Pressurised Water Reactors (EPR), it is claimed, will last longer. During their lifetimes, reactors have to be maintained and (at least once) thoroughly refurbished; eventually, corrosion and intense radioactivity make them impossible to repair. Eventually, they must be dismantled, but experience of this is limited. As a first step, the fuel elements must be put into storage; the cooling system must be cleaned to reduce radioactive corrosion residuals and unidentified deposits (CRUD). These operations, together, produce about 1,000 m3 of high-level waste. After a cooling-off period which may be as much as 50-100 years, the reactor has to be dismantled and cut into small pieces to be packed in containers for final disposal. The total energy required for decommissioning has been estimated at approximately 50 percent more than the energy needed in the original construction power year, about 200 tons of natural uranium has to be processed. Secondly, hex is a halogenated compound (HC), one of several that are used at various stages of the cycle. HCs are potent greenhouse gases. The global warming potential of freon-114, for instance, is nearly 10,000 times greater than that of the same mass of carbon dioxide.20 There is no published data on releases of HCs from nuclear energy. There must be a suspicion that they reduce any advantage over fossil fuels which the nuclear power industry enjoys at present in the production of greenhouse gases. Given the unfounded but popular presumption that nuclear energy is carbon-free, it would be helpful if a reliable study of all releases of greenhouse gases from the nuclear fuel cycle, and their effect on the atmosphere, were commissioned and published without delay. Ore quality Both the quantity of greenhouse gases released by nuclear energy per kilowatt hour and the net energy return power year, about 200 tons of natural uranium has to be processed. Secondly, hex is a halogenated compound (HC), one of several that are used at various stages of the cycle. HCs are potent greenhouse gases. The global warming potential of freon-114, for instance, is nearly 10,000 times greater than that of the same mass of carbon dioxide.20 There is no published data on releases of HCs from nuclear energy. There must be a suspicion that they reduce any advantage over fossil fuels which the nuclear power industry enjoys at present in the production of greenhouse gases. Given the unfounded but popular presumption that nuclear energy is carbon-free, it would be helpful if a reliable study of all releases of greenhouse gases from the nuclear fuel cycle, and their effect on the atmosphere, were commissioned and published without delay. Ore quality Both the quantity of greenhouse gases released by nuclear energy per kilowatt hour and the net energy return of the nuclear industry are determined of the nuclear industry are determined power year, about 200 tons of natural uranium has to be processed. Secondly, hex is a halogenated compound (HC), one of several that are used at various stages of the cycle. HCs are potent greenhouse gases. The global warming potential of freon-114, for instance, is nearly 10,000 times greater than that of the same mass of carbon dioxide.20 There is no published data on releases of HCs from nuclear energy. There must be a suspicion that they reduce any advantage over fossil fuels which the nuclear power industry enjoys at present in the production of greenhouse gases. Given the unfounded but popular presumption that nuclear energy is carbon-free, it would be helpful if a reliable study of all releases of greenhouse gases from the nuclear fuel cycle, and their effect on the atmosphere, were commissioned and published without delay. Ore quality Both the quantity of greenhouse gases released by nuclear energy per kilowatt hour and the net energy Secondary supplies are also in decline. The inventories are approaching exhaustion, and this has been one of the drivers of the recent sharp rise in the price of uranium.46 The amount of uranium derived from tailings has been falling, and it has been calculated that the scale of the task of increasing production of uranium-235 now would require arrays of continuously-operating gas centrifuge plants running into the millions.47 The supply of MOX fuel, derived from a reprocessing which is already at its practical limits, is not expected to increase turn of the nuclear industry are determined The contribution of Olympic Dam is in some ways even more dubious. At present, it is an underground mine well past its maturity, and the management, BHP Billiton, is considering whether to move to an adjacent ore body with an open pit mine on a massive scale. The new mine would be three kilometers in diameter and one kilometre deep, with some 350 metres of rock overburden to be removed in order to get at the ore. The problem is that the uranium ore is very low-grade – only 0.06 percent and less, with an average of 0.029 percent, so that it would be uneconomic in money terms if it were not for the copper, gold and silver which the rock also contains. But that itself is a mixed blessing because it means that the copper is contaminated with small quantities of uranium, which has to be removed in a smelter constructed in the Australian desert, adding even greater energy-costs to the final energy yield.52 Doubts as to whether Olympic Dam is capable of yielding uranium with a positive energy balance are increased by a recent study by Storm van Leeuwen, who suggests that the energy return on the energy invested in the mine is only marginally better than that of gas. Moreover, the removal of 350 metres of overburden, followed by the milling of low grade ore would require Australia to import diesel oil with an energy content not far short of the final energy-yield of the uranium it would produce. High oil prices, aggravated by actual outages in oil supplies as the effects of the oil peak mature, would cause problems for a project for which a large and reliable flow of diesel would have to be guaranteed. Moreover, the mine is in an area of extreme drought: even if it does supply its own water by desalinating seawater. 	1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155 156 157 158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 199 200 201 202 203 204 205 206 207 208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 221 222 223 224 225 226 227 228 229 230 231 232 233 234 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 243 244 245 246 247 248 249 250 251 252 253 254 255 256 257 258 259 260 261 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 272 273 274 275 276 277 278 279 280 281 282 283 284 285 286 287 288 289 290 291 292 293 294 295 296 297 298 299 300 301 302 303 304 305 306 307 308 309 310 311 312 313 314 315 316 317 318 319 320 321 322 323 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 331 332 333 334 335 336 337 338 339 340 341 342 343 344 345 346 347 348 349 350 351 352 353 354 355 356 357 358 359 360 361 362 363 364 365 366 367 368 369 370 371 372 373 374 375 376 377 378 379 380 381 382 383 384 385 386 387 388 389 390 391 392 393 394 395 396 397 398 399 400 401 402 403 404 405 406 407 408 409 410 411 412 413 414 415 416 417 418 419 420 421 422 423 424 425 426 427 428 429 430 431 432 433 434 435 436 437 438 439 440 441 442 443 444 445 446 447 448 449 450 451 452 453 454 455 456 457 458 459 460 461 462 463 464 465 466 467 468 469 470 471 472 473 474 475 476 477 478 479 480 481 482 483 484 485 486 487 488 489 490 491 492 493 494 495 496 497 498 499 500 501 502 503 504 505 506 507 508 509 510 511 512 513 514 515 516 517 518 519 520 521 522 523 524 525 526 527 528 529 530 531 532 533 534 535 536 537 538 539 540 541 542 543 544 545 546 547 548 549 550 551 552 553 554 555 556 557 558 559 560 561 562 563 564 565 566 567 568 569 570 571 572 573 574 575 576 577 578 579 580 581 582 583 584 585 586 587 588 589 590 591 592 593 594 595 596 597 598 599 600 601 602 603 604 605 606 607 608 609 610 611 612 613 614 615 616 617 618 619 620 621 622 623 624 625 626 627 628 629 630 631 632 633 634 635 636 637 638 639 640 641 642 643 644 645 646 647 648 649 650 651 652 653 654 655 656 657 658 659 660 661 662 663 664 665 666 667 668 669 670 671 672 673 674 675 676 677 678 679 680 681 682 683 684 685 686 687 688 689 690 691 692 693 694 695 696 697 698 699 700 701 702 703 704 705 706 707 708 709 710 711 712 713 714 715 716 717 718 719 720 721 722 723 724 725 726 727 728 729 730 731 732 733 734 735 736 737 738 739 740 741 742 743 744 745 746 747 748 749 750 751 752 753 754 755 756 757 758 759 760 761 762 763 764 765 766 767 768 769 770 771 772 773 774 775 776 777 778 779 780 781 782 783 784 785 786 787 788 789 790 791 792 793 794 795 796 797 798 799 800 801 802 803 804 805 806 807 808 809 810 811 812 813 814 815 816 817 818 819 820 821 822 823 824 825 826 827 828 829 830 831 832 833 834 835 836 837 838 839 840 841 842 843 844 845 846 847 848 849 850 851 852 853 854 855 856 857 858 859 860 861 862 863 864 865 866 867 868 869 870 871 872 873 874 875 876 877 878 879 880 881 882 883 884 885 886 887 888 889 890 891 892 893 894 895 896 897 898 899 900 901 902 903 904 905 906 907 908 909 910 911 912 913 914 915 916 917 918 919 920 921 922 923 924 925 926 927 928 929 930 931 932 933 934 935 936 937 938 939 940 941 942 943 944 945 946 947 948 949 950 951 952 953 954 955 956 957 958 959 960 961 962 963 964 965 966 967 968 969 970 971 972 973 974 975 976 977 978 979 980 981 982 983 984 985 986 987 988 989 990 991 992 993 994 995 996 997 998 999 1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 1030 1031 1032 1033 1034 1035 1036 1037 1038 1039 1040 1041 1042 1043 1044 1045 1046 1047 1048 1049 1050 1051 1052 1053 1054 1055 1056 1057 1058 1059 1060 1061 1062 1063 1064 1065 1066 1067 1068 1069 1070 1071 1072 1073 1074 1075 1076 1077 1078 1079 1080 1081 1082 1083 1084 1085 1086 1087 1088 1089 1090 1091 1092 1093 1094 1095 1096 1097 1098 1099 1100 1101 1102 1103 1104 1105 1106 1107 1108 1109 1110 1111 1112 1113 1114 1115 1116 1117 1118 1119 1120 1121 1122 1123 1124 1125 1126 1127 1128 1129 1130 1131 1132 1133 1134 1135 1136 1137 1138 1139 1140 1141 1142 1143 1144 1145 1146 1147 1148 1149 1150 1151 1152 1153 1154 1155 1156 1157 1158 1159 1160 1161 1162 1163 1164 1165 1166 1167 1168 1169 1170 1171 1172 1173 1174 1175 1176 1177 1178 1179 1180 1181 1182 1183 1184 1185 1186 1187 1188 1189 1190 1191 1192 1193 1194 1195 1196 1197 1198 1199 1200 1201 1202 1203 1204 1205 1206 1207 1208 1209 1210 1211 1212 1213 1214 1215 1216 1217 1218 1219 1220 1221 1222 1223 1224 1225 1226 1227 1228 1229 1230 1231 1232 1233 1234 1235 1236 1237 1238 1239 1240 1241 1242 1243 1244 1245 1246 1247 1248 1249 1250 1251 1252 1253 1254 1255 1256 1257 1258 1259 1260 1261 1262 1263 1264 1265 1266 1267 1268 1269 1270 1271 1272 1273 1274 1275 1276 1277 1278 1279 1280 1281 1282 1283 1284 1285 1286 1287 1288 1289 1290 1291 1292 1293 1294 1295 1296 1297 1298 1299 1300 1301 1302 1303 1304 1305 1306 1307 1308 1309 1310 1311 1312 1313 1314 1315 1316 1317 1318 1319 1320 1321 1322 1323 1324 1325 1326 1327 1328 1329 1330 1331 1332 1333 1334 1335 1336 1337 1338 1339 1340 1341 1342 1343 1344 1345 1346 1347 1348 1349 1350 1351 1352 1353 1354 1355 1356 1357 1358 1359 1360 1361 1362 1363 1364 1365 1366 1367 1368 1369 1370 1371 1372 1373 1374 1375 1376 1377 1378 1379 1380 1381 1382 1383 1384 1385 1386 1387 1388 1389 1390 1391 1392 1393 1394 1395 1396 1397 1398 1399 1400 1401 1402 1403 1404 1405 1406 1407 1408 1409 1410 1411 1412 1413 1414 1415 1416 1417 1418 1419 1420 1421 1422 1423 1424 1425 1426 1427 1428 1429 1430 1431 1432 1433 1434 1435 1436 1437 1438 1439 1440 1441 1442 1443 1444 1445 1446 1447 1448 1449 1450 1451 1452 1453 1454 1455 1456 1457 1458 1459 1460 1461 1462 1463 1464 1465 1466 1467 1468 1469 1470 1471 1472 1473 1474 1475 1476 1477 1478 1479 1480 1481 1482 1483 1484 1485 1486 1487 1488 1489 1490 1491 1492 1493 1494 1495 1496 1497 1498 1499 1500 1501 1502 1503 1504 1505 1506 1507 1508 1509 1510 1511 1512 1513 1514 1515 1516 1517 1518 1519 1520 1521 1522 1523 1524 1525 1526 1527 1528 1529 1530 1531 1532 1533 1534 1535 1536 1537 1538 1539 1540 1541 1542 1543 1544 1545 1546 1547 1548 1549 1550 1551 1552 1553 1554 1555 1556 1557 1558 1559 1560 1561 1562 1563 1564 1565 1566 1567 1568 1569 1570 1571 1572 1573 1574 1575 1576 1577 1578 1579 1580 1581 1582 1583 1584 1585 1586 1587 1588 1589 1590 1591 1592 1593 1594 1595 1596 1597 1598 1599 1600 1601 1602 1603 1604 1605 1606 1607 1608 1609 1610 1611 1612 1613 1614 1615 1616 1617 1618 1619 1620 1621 1622 1623 1624 1625 1626 1627 1628 1629 1630 1631 1632 1633 1634 1635 1636 1637 1638 1639 1640 1641 1642 1643 1644 1645 1646 1647 1648 1649 1650 1651 1652 1653 1654 1655 1656 1657 1658 1659 1660 1661 1662 1663 1664 1665 1666 1667 1668 1669 1670 1671 1672 1673 1674 1675 1676 1677 1678 1679 1680 1681 1682 1683 1684 1685 1686 1687 1688 1689 1690 1691 1692 1693 1694 1695 1696 1697 1698 1699 1700 1701 1702 1703 1704 1705 1706 1707 1708 1709 1710 1711 1712 1713 1714 1715 1716 1717 1718 1719 1720 1721 1722 1723 1724 1725 1726 1727 1728 1729 1730 1731 1732 1733 1734 1735 1736 1737 1738 1739 1740 1741 1742 1743 1744 1745 1746 1747 1748 1749 1750 1751 1752 1753 1754 1755 1756 1757 1758 1759 1760 1761 1762 1763 1764 1765 1766 1767 1768 1769 1770 1771 1772 1773 1774 1775 1776 1777 1778 1779 1780 1781 1782 1783 1784 1785 1786 1787 1788 1789 1790 1791 1792 1793 1794 1795 1796 1797 1798 1799 1800 1801 1802 1803 1804 1805 1806 1807 1808 1809 1810 1811 1812 1813 1814 1815 1816 1817 1818 1819 1820 1821 1822 1823 1824 1825 1826 1827 1828 1829 1830 1831 1832 1833 1834 1835 1836 1837 1838 1839 1840 1841 1842 1843 1844 1845 1846 1847 1848 1849 1850 1851 1852 1853 1854 1855 1856 1857 1858 1859 1860 1861 1862 1863 1864 1865 1866 1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1877 1878 1879 1880 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 1897 1898 1899 1900 1901 1902 1903 1904 1905 1906 1907 1908 1909 1910 1911 1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 1947 1948 1949 1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 2041 2042 2043 2044 2045 2046 2047 2048 2049 2050 2051 2052 2053 2054 2055 2056 2057 2058 2059 2060 2061 2062 2063 2064 2065 2066 2067 2068 2069 2070 2071 2072 2073 2074 2075 2076 2077 2078 2079 2080 2081 2082 2083 2084 2085 2086 2087 2088 2089 2090 2091 2092 2093 2094 2095 2096 2097 2098 2099 2100 2101 2102 2103 2104 2105 2106 2107 2108 2109 2110 2111 2112 2113 2114 2115 2116 2117 2118 2119 2120 2121 2122 2123 2124 2125 2126 2127 2128 2129 2130 2131 2132 2133 2134 2135 2136 2137 2138 2139 2140 2141 2142 2143 2144 2145 2146 2147 2148 2149 2150 2151 2152 2153 2154 2155 2156 2157 2158 2159 2160 2161 2162 2163 2164 2165 2166 2167 2168 2169 2170 2171 2172 2173 2174 2175 2176 2177 2178 2179 2180 2181 2182 2183 2184 2185 2186 2187 2188 2189 2190 2191 2192 2193 2194 2195 2196 2197 2198 2199 2200 2201 2202 2203 2204 2205 2206 2207 2208 2209 2210 2211 2212 2213 2214 2215 2216 2217 2218 2219 2220 2221 2222 2223 2224 2225 2226 2227 2228 2229 2230 2231 2232 2233 2234 2235 2236 2237 2238 2239 2240 2241 2242 2243 2244 2245 2246 2247 2248 2249 2250 2251 2252 2253 2254 2255 2256 2257 2258 2259 2260 2261 2262 2263 2264 2265 2266 2267 2268 2269 2270 2271 2272 2273 2274 2275 2276 2277 2278 2279 2280 2281 2282 2283 2284 2285 2286 2287 2288 2289 2290 2291 2292 2293 2294 2295 2296 2297 2298 2299 2300 2301 2302 2303 2304 2305 2306 2307 2308 2309 2310 2311 2312 2313 2314 2315 2316 2317 2318 2319 2320 2321 2322 2323 2324 2325 2326 2327 2328 2329 2330 2331 2332 2333 2334 2335 2336 2337 2338 2339 2340 2341 2342 2343 2344 2345 2346 2347 2348 2349 2350 2351 2352 2353 2354 2355 2356 2357 2358 2359 2360 2361 2362 2363 2364 2365 2366 2367 2368 2369 2370 2371 2372 2373 2374 2375 2376 2377 2378 2379 2380 2381 2382 2383 2384 2385 2386 2387 2388 2389 2390 2391 2392 2393 2394 2395 2396 2397 2398 2399 2400 2401 2402 2403 2404 2405 2406 2407 2408 2409 2410 2411 2412 2413 2414 2415 2416 2417 2418 2419 2420 2421 2422 2423 2424 2425 2426 2427 2428 2429 2430 2431 2432 2433 2434 2435 2436 2437 2438 2439 2440 2441 2442 2443 2444 2445 2446 2447 2448 2449 2450 2451 2452 2453 2454 2455 2456 2457 2458 2459 2460 2461 2462 2463 2464 2465 2466 2467 2468 2469 2470 2471 2472 2473 2474 2475 2476 2477 2478 2479 2480 2481 2482 2483 2484 2485 2486 2487 2488 2489 2490 2491 2492 2493 2494 2495 2496 2497 2498 2499 2500 2501 2502 2503 2504 2505 2506 2507 2508 2509 2510 2511 2512 2513 2514 2515 2516 2517 2518 2519 2520 2521 2522 2523 2524 2525 2526 2527 2528 2529 2530 2531 2532 2533 2534 2535 2536 2537 2538 2539 2540 2541 2542 2543 2544 2545 2546 2547 2548 2549 2550 2551 2552 2553 2554 2555 2556 2557 2558 2559 2560 2561 2562 2563 2564 2565 2566 2567 2568 2569 2570 2571 2572 2573 2574 2575 2576 2577 2578 2579 2580 2581 2582 2583 2584 2585 2586 2587 2588 2589 2590 2591 2592 2593 2594 2595 2596 2597 2598 2599 2600 2601 2602 2603 2604 2605 2606 2607 2608 2609 2610 2611 2612 2613 2614 2615 2616 2617 2618 2619 2620 2621 2622 2623 2624 2625 2626 2627 2628 2629 2630 2631 2632 2633 2634 2635 2636 2637 2638 2639 2640 2641 2642 2643 2644 2645 2646 2647 2648 2649 2650 2651 2652 2653 2654 2655 2656 2657 2658 2659 2660 2661 2662 2663 2664 2665 2666 2667 2668 2669 2670 2671 2672 2673 2674 2675 2676 2677 2678 2679 2680 2681 2682 2683 2684 2685 2686 2687 2688 2689 2690 2691 2692 2693 2694 2695 2696 2697 2698 2699 2700 2701 2702 2703 2704 2705 2706 2707 2708 2709 2710 2711 2712 2713 2714 2715 2716 2717 2718 2719 2720 2721 2722 2723 2724 2725 2726 2727 2728 2729 2730 2731 2732 2733 2734 2735 2736 2737 2738 2739 2740 2741 2742 2743 2744 2745 2746 2747 2748 2749 2750 2751 2752 2753 2754 2755 2756 2757 2758 2759 2760 2761 2762 2763 2764 2765 2766 2767 2768 2769 2770 2771 2772 2773 2774 2775 2776 2777 2778 2779 2780 2781 2782 2783 2784 2785 2786 2787 2788 2789 2790 2791 2792 2793 2794 2795 2796 2797 2798 2799 2800 2801 2802 2803 2804 2805 2806 2807 2808 2809 2810 2811 2812 2813 2814 2815 2816 2817 2818 2819 2820 2821 2822 2823 2824 2825 2826 2827 2828 2829 2830 2831 2832 2833 2834 2835 2836 2837 2838 2839 2840 2841 2842 2843 2844 2845 2846 2847 2848 2849 2850 2851 2852 2853 2854 2855 2856 2857 2858 2859 2860 2861 2862 2863 2864 2865 2866 2867 2868 2869 2870 2871 2872 2873 2874 2875 2876 2877 2878 2879 2880 2881 2882 2883 2884 2885 2886 2887 2888 2889 2890 2891 2892 2893 2894 2895 2896 2897 2898 2899 2900 2901 2902 2903 2904 2905 2906 2907 2908 2909 2910 2911 2912 2913 2914 2915 2916 2917 2918 2919 2920 2921 2922 2923 2924 2925 2926 2927 2928 2929 2930 2931 2932 2933 2934 2935 2936 2937 2938 2939 2940 2941 2942 2943 2944 2945 2946 2947 2948 2949 2950 2951 2952 2953 2954 2955 2956 2957 2958 2959 2960 2961 2962 2963 2964 2965 2966 2967 2968 2969 2970 2971 2972 2973 2974 2975 2976 2977 2978 2979 2980 2981 2982 2983 2984 2985 2986 2987 2988 2989 2990 2991 2992 2993 2994 2995 2996 2997 2998 2999 3000. This paper describes the construction of a one million word corpus of mid-2000s written, published British English. The corpus was collected according to an existing sampling frame which has been used to build several other corpora of earlier time periods and other national varieties of English. The corpus described here is therefore potentially useful for variationist linguistic research. However, unlike other similar corpora, this corpus was created via sampling texts that had been originally published in paper form, then placed on the internet. This resulted in a much shorter construction time, but raises questions about the validity of this corpus if used as a comparator. Therefore, this paper also attempts to compare the corpus against other corpora where the same sampling frame was employed, in order to measure whether the amount of variation among highly frequent words is within an expected range. As an additional measure of validity, the paper describes some preliminary analyses of lexical differences (pronouns and keywords) between this corpus and others like it from previous time periods, in order to determine whether the resulting findings would be expected, according to existing theories of language change in British English (i.e. democratisation, colloquialisation and Americanisation). As this paper is about the construction of a new corpus which uses an old sampling frame, it is useful to start with some history. The well-known Brown family of reference corpora occupy an important place in the canon of corpus linguistics research. In the early 1960s, at Brown University, W. Nelson Francis and Henry Kucera collected just over one million words of running text from edited English prose that had been published in the United States of America in 1961. They called it ‘The Standard Corpus of Present-Day American English’, although it was to be later known as the ‘Brown Corpus’. The Corpus, which contained 500 texts, each approximately 2,000 words in length, consisted of four main genres of writing: Press (about 18%), Fiction (25%), Academic Writing (16%) and General Prose (41%), which were further divided into fifteen sub-genres. These genres and their subdivisions had been decided by the participants at a conference held at Brown University in 1963 (Francis & Kucera 1979), and the proportions were based on the amount of actual publications during 1961. Between 1970 and 1976, a British version of the Brown Corpus was built, under a project jointly conducted at Lancaster University, the Norwegian Computing Centre of the Humanities at Bergen and the University of Oslo. Using the same sampling procedures, the corpus also collected texts published in 1961, and was called the LOB (Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen) Corpus. Brown and LOB, being the same size and having the same sampling frame, were an ideal pair of corpora for the study of language variation and cultural differences between British and American English; see for example, Hofland & Johansson (1982), Leech & Fallon (1992). In the early 1990s, at Freiburg University, new corpora of American and British English were created, again using the same sampling frame. The two resulting corpora were referred to as Freiburg-Brown and Freiburg-LOB (often abbreviated to Frown and FLOB). The four corpora make up a “family”, allowing for comparisons across time as well as between cultures, and have been used by researchers in order to examine both synchronic and diachronic change. For example, Mair et al. (2003) compared part of speech frequencies between LOB and FLOB, while Oakes (2003) carried out a comparison of lexis in FLOB and Frown. Other researchers have examined all four corpora, particularly to argue that while American and British English are changing, it is American English that is leading the way, e.g. Hundt (1997), Leech (2002), McEnery and Xiao (2005). For example, Leech (2002) shows that, in general, use of modal verbs (should, ought, would, will, 314 Paul Baker etc.) appears to have decreased in both American and British English between the early 1960s and early 1990s, although the picture of British English in the 1990s is remarkably similar to that of American English in the 1960s. Leech (2002) warns that a thirty-year gap does not necessarily mean that any change in frequency is indicative of a linear and smooth increase (or decrease); instead, the picture may be more complex, although Leech’s findings (and the explanations he gives) seem more than plausible (see also Millar 2009). It is likely to be the case that one million word samples are not large enough to reveal definitive conclusions about linguistic variation and change. While the general consensus among corpus linguists is that bigger is better, it is also the case that certain linguistic phenomena require larger corpora. So Kennedy (1998: 68) suggests that 100,000 words of speech would be adequate for the study of prosody, whereas 500,000 words would be enough for an analysis of verb-form morphology. However, he notes that a million words would not suffice for lexicography as up to half of the words will only occur once. On the other hand, Biber (1993) suggests that a million words would be enough for grammatical studies. My own experience with corpus research would suggest that a million words is probably acceptable for examining usage of high frequency words (most grammatical words and a couple of hundred lexical words) but only very cautious conclusions can be made about other lexis. The British branch of the Brown family is continuing to grow. At Lancaster University, a 1930s version of LOB has been built (at this stage a definite name has not been agreed on, although both Lancaster1931 and BLOB (Before-LOB) have been suggested), and work on a 1901 version is in progress. This paper introduces a mid-2000s version of LOB. There were some differences in the construction of this corpus when compared to the corpora discussed so far. All of the Brown family have required corpus builders to keyboard or scan the written texts for their inclusion in the corpora. Clearly, during the 1960s and even the 1990s manual encoding from paper versions of the texts was the only option — it would be difficult to obtain electronic versions of most printed texts. And with the 1930s and 1901 versions, while some texts may be available in electronic form thanks to online databases of fiction, a good number would still need to be keyboarded or scanned. This is not the case, however, for contemporary language use. Since the advent of freely available hypertext via the World Wide Web (which originated around 1994 according to De Schryver 2002), it should be the case that there are billions, even trillions of words of data, already in electronic form. A number of researchers (e.g. Kilgarriff & Grefenstette 2003, Fletcher 2004, Smarr & Grow 2002) have pointed out the potential of the web, both as a kind of reference corpus in itself, and as a means of providing access to data for more careful sampling. However, Lew (2009) argues that while the WWW can be an attractive tool for online language The BE06 Corpus of British English and recent language change 315 referencing, it is ‘noisy’ (e.g. containing typos), and poorly balanced (containing a high prevalence of spam and texts about technology and the internet); therefore, the web should not replace existing models of corpus use. Part of the motivation behind building a contemporary version of LOB was therefore a feasibility study — would it be possible to collect recent texts using the same sampling frame as LOB, and if so, how long would it take, and what unforeseen problems would be encountered? An additional motivation for building a contemporary version of LOB was to do with countering criticisms that the current reference corpora in the Brown family are inadequate at representing contemporary language use in the UK. For example, FLOB contains no occurrences of the terms internet and www, and while it contains 122 citations of text, none of them refer to text as a verb (as in text messaging). At the time of writing, most current undergraduate students were born in the early 1990s and are therefore the same age as FLOB. It could be argued that students would find corpus research more interesting and motivating if up-to-date corpora were available. To give an example, one task I sometimes ask students to carry out, is to conduct a keywords analysis between LOB-1961 and FLOB-1991. This always brings up interesting results, although a glance at some of the strongest key proper nouns in FLOB (Thatcher, Kinnock, Major, Gorbachev) reveals FLOB’s status as an historic corpus, often requiring its users to operationalise contextual knowledge of the early 1990s in order to make sense of it. With the current model of adding to the Brown family every 30 years, corpus linguists would need to wait until at least 2021 before another corpus would be available. Additionally, as Leech (2002) and Millar (2009) have stated, a model of language change which focuses on periods 30 years apart may not provide an accurate picture. For example, a comparison between LOB-1961 and FLOB-1991 does not directly prove anything about the state of language use in 1975. Reducing the gap by providing multiple reference points would improve the reliability of findings, particularly in cases where over-interpretations are likely to be made due to unusual frequencies that might be caused by random sampling. Based on the above discussion, it was planned to build a contemporary version of LOB, using only written texts originally existing in paper form that had been archived on the World Wide Web. It was hoped that if such a project proved to be feasible, it would inspire other corpus-building projects, enabling more reliable investigations of language change. There are potential issues in using only texts that have been archived on the internet. While such texts were initially published in paper form, authors or editors may have taken into account the fact that their writing would eventually go online, and that may have impacted on their language use. For example, more effort may have been made to make the writing style clear (as it would be easier 316 Paul Baker for anybody to access the texts, including people not living in the UK). Authors may have therefore attempted to address an audience that is multiple rather than specific, and global rather than national. 2. Building the BE06 Text collection began in late 2007: I aimed to collect texts from the mid-2000s, which would afford a fifteen-year gap between the new corpus and FLOB — halving the traditional thirty-year gap. However, it was difficult to collect all of the texts from a single year, although 82% of the texts collected were published between 2005 and 2007. The median point of the corpus was therefore 2006, so the corpus was named ‘British English 2006’, acronymised to BE06. It was decided against continuing the tradition of using a name which rhymes with LOB for the sake of clarity. LOB, FLOB and Brown are named after the universities where they were built and their names do not reveal anything about the variety of language collected or the time period sampled. Speaking from experience, my corpus linguistics students tend to have trouble remembering exactly what is contained in Brown, Frown, LOB and FLOB, often mixing them up. Once it is explained that BE stands for British English and 06 stands for 2006, it is hoped that the label could be more easily interpreted (as is the case for the BNC and ANC where the acronyms more clearly describe the contents of the respective corpora). Text collection for the corpus was completed in May 2008. Exact records were not kept regarding the length of time it took to build the corpus, although it is estimated that it took approximately ten minutes to locate each text on the internet, copy it to a text file and make a log of its title, the author, date published, word count, website address and whether the sample was taken from the beginning, middle or end of the text. With 500 texts, this equals approximately 5,000 minutes, or 83 hours, or twelve working days. With future corpus building projects of this size, it would not be unfeasible to ask a class of, say, 60 students to locate, save and produce logs for eight or nine texts each. The resulting files could then be incorporated into a new million word reference corpus, as well as giving students the experience of the corpus building process. Not having worked on building a reference corpus before, I found it to be an invaluable experience, particularly in that it raised a number of questions regarding the way that corpus users extrapolate results from data. First-hand knowledge of the decisions that went into the creation of the BE06 was a good preparation against over-interpretation of results once its analysis began (cf. Section 5). On the whole, the text samples were reasonably easy to locate. The online news archive Lexis Nexis was used in order to obtain the Press genres A, B and C (Table 1 The BE06 Corpus of British English and recent language change 317 gives a breakdown of all of the genres). Much of the fiction and some of the nonfiction came from websites of publishers who sometimes include short samples of books for readers to “try before they buy”. Additionally, a growing number of authors are now engaged in self-marketing and hence individually created author websites which contained samples of novels were also a good source of data. Here though, there were restrictions — some authors only provided very short extracts, and ideally samples were required to be between 1,950 and 2,050 words in size for inclusion. Additionally, there were some limitations based on what texts or parts of texts were available on the fiction websites. In the majority of cases, authors tended to print extracts of the beginnings of their novels. The sampling frame of the original Brown corpus had stressed the importance of taking random text extracts from a random point in each individual text (using random number tables), so as not to create a corpus of “beginnings” or “ends”. The later FLOB corpus did not use such strict random sampling, but instead the creators tried to create as close a “match” to the texts in LOB as possible. With the BE06, matched samples werealso used where possible (e.g. with the news texts). However, this was not always feasible with some genres, where text collection had to be more opportunistic. Ultimately, the BE06 breaks down as follows: 37% beginnings of texts, 26% middles of texts and 5% ends of texts. Additionally, 32% of the files contained full texts. This was the case for short texts which were about 2,000 words in length. However, in the majority of these cases, particularly for genres A-C and E, many of the texts available were shorter than 2,000 words and therefore had to be combined together to make up a 2,000 word sample. This was done by only considering, say, newspaper articles from a single genre of a single edition of one newspaper (e.g. file A03 contains three news stories from The Daily Mail, November 30, 2006). It would have been possible to only consider news articles that consisted of 2,000 words or more, but such articles are relatively rare and would be unrepresentative of the genre. This method of using multiple small texts from the same source was in keeping with the sampling strategy used in building the other members of the Brown family. Academic prose presented few difficulties for collection (thanks to a subscription to online versions of journals via the University of Lancaster). The databases Metalib and Google Scholar also provided a wide range of choice. The General Prose genre (especially text categories E, F and G) required a much wider selection of sites to be utilized. One route involved using the websites of various magazines where some articles are made accessible online. I also relied on publishers’ websites for Belles Lettres, Biographies and Essays and parliament websites such as the Home Office for government reports. Additionally, the websites of various British companies (such as Marks & Spencer or British Airways) were useful in eliciting company reports. On the whole then, the fiction sub-genres were the most problematic with regard to sampling, although with the resulting corpus, it is unlikely that this has unduly hampered the usability of the BE06 or its comparability with the other members of the Brown family. A further problem involved deciding what constituted a ‘British’ text. A number of possible definitions of a British text or a British author were initially considered. For example, any text published in the UK could be considered a British text, although this did not transpire to be a helpful definition (as many texts may have first been published in other countries, or were written by authors who were not British). At the start of the corpus building project it was hypothesised that academic journals containing the word British would be a good potential source of data, although this did not prove to be the case as many contributors to such journals were American or Australian. Definitions based on the author were considered instead, although here a distinction could be made between an author who was born in the UK, an author who currently lived in the UK, and an author who (had) mainly lived in the UK. It was decided that the latter case would be the mostfruitful in yielding British texts, although some leeway was allowed. For academic texts, for example, if an author was working at a British university and it was difficult to find out information regarding their place of birth, it was decided that they were probably likely to write according to the conventions of standard British English. It should be borne in mind that errors in classification can happen, and it is also difficult to assume that a single author is responsible for any published text.1 In reality, many people are likely to have contributed towards its creation, from reading and commenting on initial drafts, to making pre-publication decisions regarding say, use of American -ize or British -ise. Having collected the corpus, a number of formatting changes were carried out on it. For example, left and right quotation marks ‘ ’ were changed to ' and ' in order to facilitate analysis via WordSmith Tools. Additionally, the figures &, < and > were changed to SGML entities & < and > respectively. Tables and figures were removed from the texts, although labels of tables were retained. Once the corpus had been built, the issue of copyright and permissions needed to be addressed. Having been involved in seeking permissions for other academic research (which had proven to be expensive, frustrating and time consuming), I decided to postpone this stage for the present and instead try to find a way to make the corpus available to the research community without actually giving away any texts. Again, the world wide web presented a solution. Following the approach taken by Davies (2009), who has made the 385+ million word Corpus of Contemporary American English available online, it was decided to mount the corpus on the CQP (Corpus Query Processor) web server at Lancaster University (similar to that described in Hoffmann & Evert 2006) which is being developed by Andrew Hardie and Sebastian Hoffmann, and is accessible via a user-name and password.2 Users can make concordances, perform frequency counts and examine distributions of linguistic. A nuclear weapon (also called an atom bomb, nuke, atomic bomb, nuclear warhead, A-bomb, or nuclear bomb) is an explosive device that derives its destructive force from nuclear reactions, either fission (fission bomb) or from a combination of fission and fusion reactions (thermonuclear bomb). Both bomb types release large quantities of energy from relatively small amounts of matter. The first test of a fission ("atomic") bomb released an amount of energy approximately equal to 20,000 tons of The first thermonuclear ("hydrogen") bomb test released energy approximately equal to 10 million tons of TNT. A thermonuclear weapon weighing little more than 2,400 pounds (1,100 kg) can release energy equal to more than 1.2 million tons of TNT A nuclear device no larger than traditional bombs can devastate an entire city by blast, fire, and radiation. Since they are weapons of mass destruction, the proliferation of nuclear weapons is a focus of international relations policy. Nuclear weapons have been used twice in war, both times by the United States against Japan near the end of World War II. On August 6, 1945, the U.S. Army Air Forces detonated a uranium gun-type fission bomb nicknamed "Little Boy" over the Japanese city of Hiroshima; three days later, on August 9, the U.S. Army Air Forces detonated a plutonium implosion-type fission bomb nicknamed "Fat Man" over the Japanese city of Nagasaki. These bombings caused injuries that resulted in the deaths of approximately 200,000 civilians and military personnel.[3] The ethics of these bombings and their role in Japan's surrender are subjects of debate.Since the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, nuclear weapons have been detonated over two thousand times for testing and demonstration. Only a few nations possess such weapons or are suspected of seeking them. The only countries known to have detonated nuclear weapons—and acknowledge possessing them—are (chronologically by date of first test) the United States, the Soviet Union (succeeded as a nuclear power by Russia), the United Kingdom, France, China, India, Pakistan, and North Korea. Israel is believed to possess nuclear weapons, though, in a policy of deliberate ambiguity, it does not acknowledge having them. Germany, Italy, Turkey, Belgium and the Netherlands are nuclear weapons sharing states. South Africa is the only country to have independently developed and then renounced and dismantled its nuclear weapons.The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons aims to reduce the spread of nuclear weapons, but its effectiveness has been questioned, and political tensions remained high in the 1970s and 1980s. Modernisation of weapons continues to this dayAll existing nuclear weapons derive some of their explosive energy from nuclear fission reactions. Weapons whose explosive output is exclusively from fission reactions are commonly referred to as atomic bombs or atom bombs (abbreviated as A-bombs). This has long been noted as something of a misnomer, as their energy comes from the nucleus of the atom, just as it does with fusion weapons. In fission weapons, a mass of fissile material (enriched uranium or plutonium) is forced into supercriticality—allowing an exponential growth of nuclear chain reactions—either by shooting one piece of sub-critical material into another (the "gun" method) or by compression of a subcritical sphere or cylinder of fissile material using chemically-fueled explosive lenses. The latter approach, the "implosion" method, is more sophisticated than the former. A major challenge in all nuclear weapon designs is to ensure that a significant fraction of the fuel is consumed before the weapon destroys itself. The amount of energy released by fission bombs can range from the equivalent of just under a ton to upwards of 500,000 tonsAll fission reactions generate fission products, the remains of the split atomic nuclei. Many fission products are either highly radioactive (but short-lived) or moderately radioactive (but long-lived), and as such, they are a serious form of radioactive contamination. Fission products are the principal radioactive component of nuclear fallout. Another source of radioactivity is the burst of free neutrons produced by the weapon. When they collide with other nuclei in surrounding material, the neutrons transmute those nuclei into other isotopes, altering their stability and making them radioactive. The most commonly used fissile materials for nuclear weapons applications have been uranium-235 and plutonium-239. Less commonly used has been uranium-233. Neptunium-237 and some isotopes of americium may be usable for nuclear explosives as well, but it is not clear that this has ever been implemented, and their plausible use in nuclear weapons is a matter of dispute. The other basic type of nuclear weapon produces a large proportion of its energy in nuclear fusion reactions. Such fusion weapons are generally referred to as thermonuclear weapons or more colloquially as hydrogen bombs (abbreviated as H-bombs), as they rely on fusion reactions between isotopes of hydrogen (deuterium and tritium). All such weapons derive a significant portion of their energy from fission reactions used to "trigger" fusion reactions, and fusion reactions can themselves trigger additional fission reactions. [13] Only six countries—United States, Russia, United Kingdom, China, France, and India—have conducted thermonuclear weapon tests. (Whether India has detonated a "true" multi-staged thermonuclear weapon is controversial.) [14] North Korea claims to have tested a fusion weapon as of January 2016, though this claim is disputed. [15] Thermonuclear weapons are considered much more difficult to successfully design and execute than primitive fission weapons. Almost all of the nuclear weapons deployed today use the thermonuclear design because it is more efficient. Thermonuclear bombs work by using the energy of a fission bomb to compress and heat fusion fuel. In the Teller-Ulam design, which accounts for all multimegaton yield hydrogen bombs, this is accomplished by placing a fission bomb and fusion fuel (tritium, deuterium, or lithium deuteride) in proximity within a special, radiation-reflecting container. When the fission bomb is detonated, gamma rays and X-rays emitted first compress the fusion fuel, then heat it to thermonuclear temperatures. The ensuing fusion reaction creates enormous numbers of high-speed neutrons, which can then induce fission in materials not normally prone to it, such as depleted uranium. Each of these components is known as a "stage", with the fission bomb as the "primary" and the fusion capsule as the "secondary". In large, megaton-range hydrogen bombs, about half of the yield comes from the final fissioning of depleted uranium. [11] Virtually all thermonuclear weapons deployed today use the "two-stage" design described above, but it is possible to add additional fusion stages—each stage igniting a larger amount of fusion fuel in the next stage. This technique can be used to construct thermonuclear weapons of arbitrarily large yield, in contrast to fission bombs, which are limited in their explosive force. The largest nuclear weapon ever detonated, the Tsar Bomba of the USSR, which released an energy equivalent of over 50 megatons of TNT (210 PJ), was a three-stage weapon. Most thermonuclear weapons are considerably smaller than this, due to practical constraints from missile warhead space and weight requirements. [16] Fusion reactions do not create fission products, and thus contribute far less to the creation of nuclear fallout than fission reactions, but because all thermonuclear weapons contain at least one fission stage, and many high-yield thermonuclear devices have a final fission stage, thermonuclear weapons can generate at least as much nuclear fallout as fission-only weapons There are other types of nuclear weapons as well. For example, a boosted fission weapon is a fission bomb that increases its explosive yield through a small number of fusion reactions, but it is not a fusion bomb. In the boosted bomb, the neutrons produced by the fusion reactions serve primarily to increase the efficiency of the fission bomb. There are two types of boosted fission bomb: internally boosted, in which a deuterium-tritium mixture is injected into the bomb core, and externally boosted, in which concentric shells of lithium-deuteride and depleted uranium are layered on the outside of the fission bomb core. Some nuclear weapons are designed for special purposes; a neutron bomb is a thermonuclear weapon that yields a relatively small explosion but a relatively large amount of neutron radiation; such a device could theoretically be used to cause massive casualties while leaving infrastructure mostly intact and creating a minimal amount of fallout. The detonation of any nuclear weapon is accompanied by a blast of neutron radiation. Surrounding a nuclear weapon with suitable materials (such as cobalt or gold) creates a weapon known as a salted bomb. This device can produce exceptionally large quantities of long-lived radioactive contamination. It has been conjectured that such a device could serve as a "doomsday weapon" because such a large quantity of radio activities with half-lives of decades, lifted into the stratosphere where winds would distribute it around the globe, would make all life on the planet extinct. In connection with the Strategic Defense Initiative, research into the nuclear pumped laser was conducted under the DOD program Project Excalibur but this did not result in a working weapon. The concept involves the tapping of the energy of an exploding nuclear bomb to power a single-shot laser which is directed at a distant target. During the Starfish Prime high-altitude nuclear test in 1962, an unexpected effect was produced which is called a nuclear electromagnetic pulse. This is an intense flash of electromagnetic energy produced by a rain of high energy electrons which in turn are produced by a nuclear bomb's gamma rays. This flash of energy can permanently destroy or disrupt electronic equipment if insufficiently shielded. It has been proposed to use this effect to disable an enemy's military and civilian infrastructure as an adjunct to other nuclear or conventional military operations against that enemy. Because the effect is produced by high altitude nuclear detonations, it can produce damage to electronics over a wide, even continental, geographical area.
 Research has been done into the possibility of pure fusion bombs: nuclear weapons that consist of fusion reactions without requiring a fission bomb to initiate them. Such a device might provide a simpler path to thermonuclear weapons than one that required development of fission weapons first, and pure fusion weapons would create significantly less nuclear fallout than other thermonuclear weapons, because they would not disperse fission products. In 1998, the United States Department of Energy divulged that the United States had, "...made a substantial investment" in the past to develop pure fusion weapons, but that, "The U.S. does not have and is not developing a pure fusion weapon", and that, "No credible design for a pure fusion weapon resulted from the DOE investment". [17] Antimatter, which consists of particles resembling ordinary matter particles in most of their properties but having opposite electric charge, has been considered as a trigger mechanism for nuclear weapons. A major obstacle is the difficulty of producing antimatter in large enough quantities, and there is no evidence that it is feasible beyond the military domain. [21] However, the U.S. Air Force funded studies of the physics of antimatter in the Cold War, and began considering its possible use in weapons, not just as a trigger, but as the explosive itself. [22] A fourth generation nuclear weapon design [18] is related to, and relies upon, the same principle as antimatter-catalyzed nuclear pulse propulsion. [23] Most variation in nuclear weapon design is for the purpose of achieving different yields for different situations, and in manipulating design elements to attempt to minimize weapon size. The system used to deliver a nuclear weapon to its target is an important factor affecting both nuclear weapon design and nuclear strategy. The design, development, and maintenance of delivery systems are among the most expensive parts of a nuclear weapons program; they account, for example, for 57% of the financial resources spent by the United States on nuclear weapons projects since 1940. [24] The simplest method for delivering a nuclear weapon is a gravity bomb dropped from aircraft; this was the method used by the United States against Japan. This method places few restrictions on the size of the weapon. It does, however, limit attack range, response time to an impending attack, and the number of weapons that a country can field at the same time. With miniaturization, nuclear bombs can be delivered by both strategic bombers and tactical fighter-bombers. This method is the primary means of nuclear weapons delivery; the majority of U.S. nuclear warheads, for example, are free-fall gravity bombPreferable from a strategic point of view is a nuclear weapon mounted on a missile, which can use a ballistic trajectory to deliver the warhead over the horizon. Although even short-range missiles allow for a faster and less vulnerable attack, the development of long-range intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) has given some nations the ability to plausibly deliver missiles anywhere on the globe with a high likelihood of success. More advanced systems, such as multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles (MIRVs), can launch multiple warheads at different targets from one missile, reducing the chance of a successful missile defense. Today, missiles are most common among systems designed for delivery of nuclear weapons. Making a warhead small enough to fit onto a missile, though, can be difficult	Tactical weapons have involved the most variety of delivery types, including not only gravity bombs and missiles but also artillery shells, land mines, and nuclear depth charges and torpedoes for anti-submarine warfare. An atomic mortar has been tested by the United States. Small, two-man portable tactical weapons (somewhat misleadingly referred to as suitcase bombs), such as the Special Atomic Demolition Munition, have been developed, although the difficulty of combining sufficient yield with portability limits their military utility nuclear warfare strategy is a set of policies that deal with preventing or fighting a nuclear war. The policy of trying to prevent an attack by a nuclear weapon from another country by threatening nuclear retaliation is known as the strategy of nuclear deterrence. The goal in deterrence is to always maintain a second strike capability (the ability of a country to respond to a nuclear attack with one of its own) and potentially to strive for first strike status (the ability to destroy an enemy's nuclear forces before they could retaliate). During the Cold War, policy and military theorists considered the sorts of policies that might prevent a nuclear attack, and they developed game theory models that could lead to stable deterrence conditions Different forms of nuclear weapons delivery (see above) allow for different types of nuclear strategies. The goals of any strategy are generally to make it difficult for an enemy to launch a pre-emptive strike against the weapon system and difficult to defend against the delivery of the weapon during a potential conflict. This can mean keeping weapon locations hidden, such as deploying them on submarines or land mobile transporter erector launchers whose locations are difficult to track, or it can mean protecting weapons by burying them in hardened missile silo bunkers. Other components of nuclear strategies included using missile defences to destroy the missiles before they land, or implementing civil defence measures using early-warning systems to evacuate citizens to safe areas before an attack. Weapons designed to threaten large populations or to deter attacks are known as strategic weapons. Nuclear weapons for use on a battlefield in military situations are called tactical weapons. Critics of nuclear war strategy often suggest that a nuclear war between two nations would result in mutual annihilation. From this point of view, the significance of nuclear weapons is to deter war because any nuclear war would escalate out of mutual distrust and fear, resulting in mutually assured destruction. This threat of national, if not global, destruction has been a strong motivation for anti-nuclear weapons activism Critics from the peace movement and within the military establishment have questioned the usefulness of such weapons in the current military climate. According to an advisory opinion issued by the International Court of Justice in 1996, the use of (or threat of use of) such weapons would generally be contrary to the rules of international law applicable in armed conflict, but the court did not reach an opinion as to whether or not the threat or use would be lawful in specific extreme circumstances such as if the survival of the state were at stake. Another deterrence position is that nuclear proliferation can be desirable. In this case, it is argued that, unlike conventional weapons, nuclear weapons deter all-out war between states, and they succeeded in doing this during the Cold War between the U.S. and the Soviet Union. [26] In the late 1950s and early 1960s, Gen. Pierre Marie Gallois of France, an adviser to Charles de Gaulle, argued in books like The Balance of Terror: Strategy for the Nuclear Age (1961) that mere possession of a nuclear arsenal was enough to ensure deterrence, and thus concluded that the spread of nuclear weapons could increase international stability. Some prominent neo-realist scholars, such as Kenneth Waltz and John Mearsheimer, have argued, along the lines of Gallois, that some forms of nuclear proliferation would decrease the likelihood of total war, especially in troubled regions of the world where there exists a single nuclear-weapon state. Aside from the public opinion that opposes proliferation in any form, there are two schools of thought on the matter: those, like Mearsheimer, who favored selective proliferation, [27] and Waltz, who was somewhat more non-interventionist. [28][29] Interest in proliferation and the stability-instability paradox that it generates continues to this day, with ongoing debate about indigenous Japanese and South Korean nuclear deterrent against North Korea. [30] The threat of potentially suicidal terrorists possessing nuclear weapons (a form of nuclear terrorism) complicates the decision process. The prospect of mutually assured destruction might not deter an enemy who expects to die in the confrontation. Further, if the initial act is from a stateless terrorist instead of a sovereign nation, there might not be a nation or specific target to retaliate against. It has been argued, especially after the September 11, 2001, attacks, that this complication calls for a new nuclear strategy, one that is distinct from that which gave relative stability during the Cold War. [31] Since 1996, the United States has had a policy of allowing the targeting of its nuclear weapons at terrorists armed with weapons of mass destruction. [32] Robert Gallucci argues that although traditional deterrence is not an effective approach toward terrorist groups bent on causing a nuclear catastrophe, Gallucci believes that "the United States should instead consider a policy of expanded deterrence, which focuses not solely on the would-be nuclear terrorists but on those states that may deliberately transfer or inadvertently leak nuclear weapons and materials to them. By threatening retaliation against those states, the United States may be able to deter that which it cannot physically prevent.". [33] Graham Allison makes a similar case, arguing that the key to expanded deterrence is coming up with ways of tracing nuclear material to the country that forged the fissile material. "After a nuclear bomb detonates, nuclear forensics cops would collect debris samples and send them to a laboratory for radiological analysis. By identifying unique attributes of the fissile material, including its impurities and contaminants, one could trace the path back to its origin." [34] The process is analogous to identifying a criminal by fingerprints. "The goal would be twofold: first, to deter leaders of nuclear states from selling weapons to terrorists by holding them accountable for any use of their weapons; second, to give leaders every incentive to tightly secure their nuclear weapons and material. Because they are weapons of mass destruction, the proliferation and possible use of nuclear weapons are important issues in international relations and diplomacy. In most countries, the use of nuclear force can only be authorized by the head of government or head of state. [35] Despite controls and regulations governing nuclear weapons, there is an inherent danger of "accidents, mistakes, false alarms, blackmail, theft, and sabotage". [36] In the late 1940s, lack of mutual trust prevented the United States and the Soviet Union from making progress on arms control agreements. The Russell–Einstein Manifesto was issued in London on July 9, 1955, by Bertrand Russell in the midst of the Cold War. It highlighted the dangers posed by nuclear weapons and called for world leaders to seek peaceful resolutions to Governance, control, and law international conflict. The signatories included eleven pre-eminent intellectuals and scientists, including Albert Einstein, who signed it just days before his death on April 18, 1955. A few days after the release, philanthropist Cyrus S. Eaton offered to sponsor a conference—called for in the manifesto—in Pugwash, Nova Scotia, Eaton's birthplace. This conference was to be the first of the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs, held in July 1957. By the 1960s, steps were taken to limit both the proliferation of nuclear weapons to other countries and the environmental effects of nuclear testing. The Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (1963) restricted all nuclear testing to underground nuclear testing, to prevent contamination from nuclear fallout, whereas the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (1968) attempted to place restrictions on the types of activities signatories could participate in, with the goal of allowing the transference of non-military nuclear technology to member countries without fear of proliferation. In 1957, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) was established under the mandate of the United Nations to encourage development of peaceful applications of nuclear technology, provide international safeguards against its misuse, and facilitate the application of safety measures in its use. In 1996, many nations signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, [37] which prohibits all testing of nuclear weapons. A testing ban imposes a significant hindrance to nuclear arms development by any complying country. [38] The Treaty requires the ratification by 44 specific states before it can go into force; as of 2012, the ratification of eight of these states is still required. [37] Additional treaties and agreements have governed nuclear weapons stockpiles between the countries with the two largest enter into force, these agreements helped limit and later reduce the numbers and types of nuclear weapons between the United States and the Soviet Union/Russia. Nuclear weapons have also been opposed by agreements between countries. Many nations have been declared Nuclear-Weapon Free Zones, areas where nuclear weapons production and deployment are prohibited, through the use of treaties. The Treaty of Tlatelolco (1967) prohibited any production or deployment of nuclear weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean, and the Treaty of Pelindaba (1964) prohibits nuclear weapons in many African countries. As recently as 2006 a Central Asian Nuclear Weapon Free Zone was established among the former Soviet republics of Central Asia prohibiting nuclear weapons. In 1996, the International Court of Justice, the highest court of the United Nations, issued an Advisory Opinion concerned with the "Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons". The court ruled that the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would violate various articles of international law, including the Geneva Conventions, the Hague Conventions, the UN Charter, and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Given the unique, destructive characteristics of nuclear weapons, the International Committee of the Red Cross calls on States to ensure that these weapons are never used, irrespective of whether they consider them lawful or not. Additionally, there have been other, specific actions meant to discourage countries from developing nuclear arms. In the wake of the tests by India and Pakistan in 1998, economic sanctions were (temporarily) levied against both countries, though neither were signatories with the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. One of the stated casus belli for the initiation of the 2003 Iraq War was an accusation by the United States that Iraq was actively pursuing nuclear arms The world’s endowment of uranium ore is now so depleted that the nuclear industry will never, from its own resources, be able to generate the energy it needs to clear up its own backlog of waste. It is essential that the waste should be made safe and placed in permanent storage. High-level wastes, in their temporary storage facilities, have to be managed and kept cool to prevent fire and leaks which would otherwise contaminate large areas. Shortages of uranium – and the lack of realistic alternatives – leading to interruptions in supply, can be expected to start in the middle years of the decade 2010-2019, and to deepen thereafter. The task of disposing finally of the waste could not, therefore, now be completed using only energy generated by the nuclear industry, even if the whole of the industry’s output were to be devoted to it. In order to deal with its waste, the industry will need to be a major net user of energy, almost all of it from fossil fuels. Every stage in the nuclear process, except fission, produces carbon dioxide. As the richest ores are used up, emissions will rise. Uranium enrichment uses large volumes of uranium hexafluoride, a halogenated compound (HC). Other HCs are also used in the nuclear life-cycle. HCs are greenhouse gases with global warming potentials ranging up to 10,000 times that of carbon dioxide. An independent audit should now review these findings. The quality of available data is poor, and totally inadequate in relation to the importance of the nuclear question. The audit should set out an energy-budget which establishes how much energy will be needed to make all nuclear waste safe, and where it will come from. It should also supply a briefing on the consequences of the worldwide waste backlog being abandoned untreated. There is no single solution to the coming energy gap. What is needed is a speedy program of Lean Energy, comprising: (1) energy conservation and efficiency; (2) structural change in patterns of energy-use and land-use; and (3) renewable energy; all within (4) a framework for managing the energy descent, such as Tradable Energy Quotas (TEQs). The main objectives of energy policy must be (1) to achieve a profound reduction in the release of the gases that are changing the climate, and (2) to find other ways of maintaining the energy services we need as supplies of oil and gas decline towards depletion. Nuclear power seems at first sight to have something to offer here. It does not depend on oil, gas or coal as its primary fuel. It is based on a process which does not, in itself, produce carbon dioxide. It is concentrated in a relatively small number of very large plants, so that it fits easily into the national grid. And there is even the theoretical prospect of it being able to breed its own fuel. So – what’s the problem? The question is considered here in the six chapters of this short study, which is intended as a readable introduction to the nuclear question for everyone interested in, or involved in, the debate about it. It starts here with a short description of the principles, explaining what nuclear energy is. Chapter 2 describes what has to be done in order to derive energy from uranium. Chapter 3 explains why the nuclear industry is in fact a substantial source of carbon emissions, and it makes the link with the problem of uranium depletion and the wider question of the amount of energy that has to be put into the process to get energy out of it. Chapter 4 asks whether there are alternative sources of the uranium fuel on which the industry depends, and chapter 5 sets nuclear energy in context with the energy problem as a whole. Chapter 6 draws conclusions. Now for the principles. The form of nuclear power available to us at present comes from nuclear fission, fueled by uranium. Uranium-235 is an isotope of uranium with the rare and useful property that, when struck by a neutron, it splits into two and, in the process, produces more neutrons. Some of these neutrons then proceed to split more atoms of uranium-235 in a chain of events which produces a huge amount of energy. We can get an idea of how much energy it produces by looking at Einstein’s famous equation, E=mc2, which says that the energy produced is the mass multiplied by the square of the speed of light. A little bit of mass disappears – we can think of this as the material weighing slightly less at the end of the process than at the beginning – and it is that “missing” mass which turns into energy which can be used to make steam to drive turbines and produce electricity. While other neutrons from the reaction go their separate ways, some go on to do something very interesting: if one collides with an atom of uranium-238, one of the other isotopes of uranium, it may stay there, triggering a couple of decay cycles to form plutonium-239. And plutonium-239 shares with uranium-235 the property that it, too, splits when struck by neutrons, so that it begins to act as a fuel as well. The process can be controlled; the control is provided by a moderator consisting of water or graphite, which speeds the reaction up, and by neutron-absorbing boron control rods, which slow it down. Eventually, however, the uranium gets clogged with radioactive impurities such as the barium and krypton produced when uranium-235 decays, along with “transuranic” elements such as americium and neptunium, and a lot of the uranium-235 itself gets used up. It takes a year or two for this to happen, but eventually the fuel elements have to be removed, and fresh ones inserted. The spent fuel elements are very hot and radioactive (stand close to them for a second or two and you are dead), so there are some tricky questions about what to do with them. Sometimes spent fuel is recycled (reprocessed), to extract the remaining uranium and plutonium and use them again, although you don’t get as much fuel back as you started with, and the bulk of impurities still has to be disposed of. Alternatively, the whole lot is disposed of – but there is more to this than just dumping it somewhere, for it never really goes away. The half-life of uranium-238, one of the largest constituents of the waste, is about the same as the age of the earth: 5 billion years. Those are the principles. Now for a closer look at what nuclear energy means. An informed discussion is especially needed, now that James Lovelock has produced his devastating challenge, arguing that climate change is so real, so advanced and potentially so catastrophic that the risks associated with nuclear power are trivial by comparison – and that there is no alternative. Nuclear energy, he insists, is the only large-scale option: it is feasible and practical; a nuclear renaissance is needed without delay. Well, this is undoubtedly something we need to think about and decide on; however, that thinking must be firmly based on the practical realities of the nuclear fuel cycle. We do not need to get involved in the arcane physics of the nuclear reaction itself, but we do need to know – if we are to make any sense of this – what the production of electricity from nuclear power really involves. And who is “we”? It is all of us, scientists or not: this has to be an informed citizens’ decision.5 The principal source for what follows is the long-sustained program of research on the nuclear energy life-cycle by the nuclear engineer Jan Willem Storm van Leeuwen and the nuclear scientist the late Dr Philip Smith. Their work, based on total immersion in the literature of the science and technology of nuclear power, is motivated not by the intention to make a case either for or against, but to bring the best available information on the energy balance of the nuclear industry to the attention of policy makers and into the public debate. This booklet does not rely exclusively on their research; it refers also to many other studies such as those of the University of Sydney and the U.K. Sustainable Development Commission, along with the work of the World Nuclear Association, the Uranium Information Council, Greenpeace and others. The quality of data about the nuclear energy cycle is poor, and every study reflects this in some way; nonetheless, the analysis by Storm van Leeuwen and Smith, which has benefited from several years of critics’ comments and answered questions and revisions, provides an exhaustive and well researched guide to a sensible view of the future of nuclear energy.6 If there is to be proper and inclusive consultation on the question of nuclear energy, citizens and their representatives need to be aware of some of the principles; for instance, they need to be free of popular misconceptions about the nuclear process producing no carbon dioxide and being an unlimited source of energy. This gentle tour round the nuclear life-cycle explains what happens at each stage – and it turns out, at every stage, to be in trouble. But, as we shall see, a different sort of life cycle is available – a realistic way forward. It replaces the large-scale, central, uniform technical fix with small-scale, local judgment. It adapts to local conditions and enhances skills. It is a life-cycle with promise. To produce electricity from uranium ore, this is what you have to do. 1. Mining and milling. Uranium is widely distributed in the earth’s crust, but only in minute quantities, with the exception of a few places where it has accumulated in concentrations rich enough to be used as an ore. The main deposits of ore, in order of size, are in Australia, Kazakhstan, Canada, South Africa, Namibia, Brazil, the Russian Federation, the USA, and Uzbekistan. There are some rich ores; concentrations of uranium oxide as high as 10 percent have been found, but 0.2 percent (two parts per thousand) or less is usual. Most of the usable “soft” (sandstone) uranium ores have a concentration in the range between 0.2 and 0.01 percent; in the case of “hard” (granite) ore, the usable lower limit is 0.02 percent. The mines are usually open-cast pits which may be up to 250m deep. The deeper deposits require underground workings and some uranium is mined by “in situ leaching”, where hundreds of tons of sulphuric acid, nitric acid, ammonia and other chemicals are injected into the strata and then pumped up again after some 3-25 years, yielding about a quarter of the uranium from the treated rocks and depositing unquantifiable amounts of radioactive and toxic metals into the local environment.7 When it has been mined, the ore is milled to extract the uranium oxide. In the case of ores with a concentration of 0.1 percent, the milling must grind up about 1,000 tons of rock to extract one tonne of the bright yellow oxide called “yellowcake”. Both the oxide and the tailings (that is, the 999 tons of rock that remain) are kept radioactive indefinitely by, for instance, uranium-238, and they contain all thirteen of its radioactive decay products, each one changing its identity as it decays into the next, and together forming a cascade of heavy metals with their spectacularly varied half-lives (see Radioactive Poem opposite). Once these radioactive rocks have been disturbed and milled, they stay around. They take up much more space than they did in their undisturbed state, and their radioactive products are free to be washed and blown away into the environment by rain and wind. These tailings ought therefore to be treated: the acids should be neutralized with limestone and made insoluble with phosphates; the overburden of rock covering the ore strata should be replaced and the area should be replanted with indigenous vegetation. In fact, all this is hardly ever done, and it is regarded as an ideal rather than a requirement of best practice. It would require some four times the energy needed to mine the ore in the first place.8 2. Preparing the fuel. The uranium oxide (U3O8) then has to be enriched. Natural uranium contains about 0.7 percent uranium235; the rest is mainly uranium-234 and - 238, neither of which directly support the needed chain reaction. In order to bring the concentration of uranium-235 up to the required 3.5 percent, the oxide is reacted with fluorine to form uranium hexafluoride (UF6), or “hex”, a substance with the useful property that it changes – sublimes – from a solid to a gas at 56.5°C, and it is as a gas that it is fed into an enrichment plant. About 85 percent of it promptly comes out again as waste in the form of depleted uranium hexafluoride, known as “enrichment tails”.10 Some of that waste is converted into depleted uranium metal, some of which is in turn sometimes distributed back into the environment via its use in armor-piercing shells, but most of it is stored as enrichment tails in the form of gas. It reacts violently or explodes on contact with water (including water vapor in the air), so it ought to be transferred from its temporary containers to steel and concrete containers and buried in geological repositories. In fact, most is put on hold: each year, about 8,000 tons are added to the France’s store of 200,000 tons of depleted uranium, and a further 8,000 tons are exported from Europe to Russia. The 15 percent which emerges as enriched uranium is then converted into ceramic pellets of uranium dioxide (UO2), packed in zirconium alloy tubes, and bundled together to form fuel elements for reactors. Generation. The fuel can now be used to produce heat to raise the steam to generate electricity. In due course the process generates waste in the form of spent fuel elements and, whether these are then reprocessed and re-used or not, eventually they have to be disposed of. But first they must be allowed to cool off in ponds to allow the isotopes to decay to some extent, for between 10 and 100 years – sixty years may be taken as typical. The ponds need a reliable electricity supply to keep them stirred and topped up with water to stop the radioactive fuel elements drying out and catching fire. In due course, these wastes will need to be packed, using remotely-controlled robots, into very secure canisters lined with lead, steel and pure electrolytic copper, in which they must lie buried in giant geological repositories considered to be stable. It may turn out in due course that there is one best solution, but there will never be an ideal way to store waste which will be radioactive for a thousand centuries or more and, whatever option is chosen, it will require a lot of energy. For example, the energy needed over the lifetime of a reactor to manufacture the canisters (each weighing more than ten times as much as the waste they contain), and to make the electrolytic copper, has never been verified, but it is estimated to be about equal to the energy needed to build the reactor in the first place.13 A second form of waste produced in the generation process consists of the routine release of very small amounts of radioactive isotopes such as hydrogen-3 (tritium), carbon-14, plutonium-239 and many others into the local air and water. The significance of this has only recently started to be recognized and investigated.14 A third, less predictable, form of waste occurs in the form of emissions and catastrophic releases in the event of accident. The nuclear industry has good safety systems in place; it must, because the consequences of an accident are so extreme. However, it is not immune to accident. The work is routine, requiring workers to cope with long periods of tedium punctuated by the unexpected, along with “normality-creep” as anomalies become familiar. The hazards were noted in the mid-1990s by a senior nuclear engineer working for the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission: “I believe in nuclear power but after seeing the NRC in action, I’m convinced a serious accident is not just likely, but inevitable... They’re asleep at the wheel.” Every technology has its accidents; indeed, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission estimates the probability of meltdown in the U.S. in a twenty-year period as between 15-45 percent. The risk never goes away; society bears the pain and carries on but, in the case of nuclear power, there is a difference: the consequences of a serious accident – another accident on the scale of Chernobyl, or greater, or much greater – would take nuclear power towards being an uninsurable risk, even with the help of government subsidies for the premiums.15 And a by-product of this – “waste” in the fourth sense – is the plutonium itself which, when isolated and purified in a reprocessing plant, can be brought up to weapons-grade, making it the fuel needed for nuclear proliferation. This is one of three ways in which the industry is the platform from which the proliferation of nuclear weapons can be developed; the second one is by enriching the uranium-235 to around 90 percent, rather than the mere 3.5 percent required by a reactor. The third consists of providing a source of radioactive materials which can be dispersed using conventional explosive - a “dirty bomb”. The reactor. Nuclear reactors at present have a lifetime of about 30- 40 years, but produce electricity at full power for no more than 24 years; the new European Pressurized Water Reactors (EPR), it is claimed, will last longer. During their lifetimes, reactors have to be maintained and (at least once) thoroughly refurbished; eventually, corrosion and intense radioactivity make them impossible to repair. Eventually, they must be dismantled, but experience of this is limited. As a first step, the fuel elements must be put into storage; the cooling system must be cleaned to reduce radioactive corrosion residuals and unidentified deposits (CRUD). These operations, together, produce about 1,000 m3 of high-level waste. After a cooling-off period which may be as much as 50-100 years, the reactor has to be dismantled and cut into small pieces to be packed in containers for final disposal. The total energy required for decommissioning has been estimated at approximately 50 percent more than the energy needed in the original construction. Every stage in the life-cycle of nuclear fission uses energy, and most of this energy is derived from fossil fuels. Nuclear power is therefore a substantial source of greenhouse gases. The delivery of electricity into the grid from nuclear power produces, at present, roughly one third as much carbon dioxide as the delivery of the same quantity of electricity from natural gas...17 ... or, rather, it would do so, if the full energy cost of producing electricity from uranium were counted in – including the energy cost of all the waste-disposal commitments (chapter 2). Unfortunately (in part because of the need to allow high-level waste to cool off) that is not the case. Nuclear waste-disposal is being postponed until a later date. This means that the carbon emissions associated with nuclear energy look rather good at the moment: at about 60 grams per kWh they are approximately 16 percent of the emissions produced by gas-powered electricity generation. The catch is that this figure roughly doubles when the energy-cost of waste-disposal is taken into account, and it grows relentlessly as the industry is forced to turn to lower-grade ores. What lies ahead is the prospect of the remaining ores being of such poor quality that the gas and other fossil fuels used in the nuclear life-cycle would produce less carbon dioxide per kilowatt-hour if they were used directly as fuels to generate electricity.18 Carbon dioxide is not the only greenhouse gas released by the nuclear industry. The conversion of one tonne of uranium into an enriched form requires the addition of about half a tonne of fluorine, producing uranium hexafluoride gas (hex) to be used in the centrifuge process. At the end of the process, only the enriched fraction of the gas is actually used in the reactor: the remainder, depleted hex, is left as waste. Not all of this gas can by any means be prevented from escaping into the atmosphere, and most of it will eventually do so unless it is packed into secure containers and finally buried in deep repositories.19 It is worth remembering here, first, that to supply enough enriched fuel for a standard 1GW (1 gigawatt = 1 billion watts) reactor for one full power year, about 200 tons of natural uranium has to be processed. Secondly, hex is a halogenated compound (HC), one of several that are used at various stages of the cycle. HCs are potent greenhouse gases. The global warming potential of freon-114, for instance, is nearly 10,000 times greater than that of the same mass of carbon dioxide.20 There is no published data on releases of HCs from nuclear energy. There must be a suspicion that they reduce any advantage over fossil fuels which the nuclear power industry enjoys at present in the production of greenhouse gases. Given the unfounded but popular presumption that nuclear energy is carbon-free, it would be helpful if a reliable study of all releases of greenhouse gases from the nuclear fuel cycle, and their effect on the atmosphere, were commissioned and published without delay. Both the quantity of greenhouse gases released by nuclear energy per kilowatt hour and the net energy return of the nuclear industry are determined. primarily by the quality (grade) of uranium ore that is being used. The lower the grade of ore, the more energy is needed to mine and mill it and to deal with the larger quantity of tailings. The limit, in theory, is reached with an ore grade of about 0.01 percent for soft rocks such as sandstone, and 0.02 percent for hard rocks such as granite. If grades lower than those limits were to be used, more carbon dioxide per kilowatt hour would be produced by the nuclear cycle than by the same amount of energy produced from gas. The energy return on energy invested (EREI) would be less than the energy return you would get if you generated the electricity directly in a gas turbine.29 But these are only “theoretical” limits, because in practice the turning point to a negative energy return may be substantially sooner than that. There are five key reasons why ore which is theoretically rich enough to give a positive EREI may in fact not be rich enough to justify exploitation, Deep deposits. Deposits at great depth, requiring the removal of massive overburden, or the development of very deep underground mines, require more energy to mine the resource than is required by the shallower mines now being exploited. It is virtually certain that all uranium deposits near the surface have already been discovered, so any deposits discovered in the future will be deep Water. You can have too little water (it is needed as part of the process of deriving uranium oxide from the ore) or too much (it can cause flooding). Some of the more promising mines have big water problems A trivial contribution. If the EREI of an energy project is only slightly positive, the problem is that you get so little energy back that it can never make a useful contribution to meeting demand: even with a vast industry and inputs of resources and land, you still cannot derive energy in useful amounts.  An investment that may not be available. The poorer ores of the future will have to be derived from extremely large mines, which will require many years of investment before they produce any payback at all. There has to be some doubt as to whether, in the difficult years following the oil peak, that scale of long-term financial investment will be available. This is particularly doubtful in view of the fact that nuclear energy is really suitable only for centralized electricity grids – which are likely to become increasingly obsolete in the future as supplies of natural gas (for generating grid electricity) become scarce and less reliable, and as the cost-effective alternative of improving energy efficiency locally is advanced with all speed under pressure of need. Local geological conditions. Practical local difficulties, such as flooding, can be expected to increase as deeper and more remote mines are exploited. What all of this means is that an energy source – such as uranium ore – ceases to be useful well before it actually reaches the point where the theoretical return on energy invested – TREI – turns negative. It is the practical return on energy invested – PREI – that matters. So, where does the practical turning point lie, below which the ore quality is too poor to be useful? We know that this varies with local conditions; we know that uranium ores as poor as 0.03 percent are being mined now – but only as a by-product in mines being exploited with other minerals; we know that this will be a matter of perpetual debate; and we know that the average ore grade being worked worldwide is at present about 0.15 percent.33 But for a worldwide average above which uranium ore can still provide a positive PREI, a suggested guideline is no lower than 0.1 percent. So – how much uranium ore with a positive PREI do we have left? The “Red Book” is the most authoritative source on the quantity and quality of the remaining uranium ore, and of future prospects for production. It is prepared by the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) in partnership with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and the 2005 edition was published in June 2006.35 In its discussion of the availability of usable uranium ore, it suggests that there is 70 years’ supply at the current price.36 It adds, however, that, when “prognosticated and speculative” resources are added in, there is enough to maintain current output for a further 270 years. Storm van Leeuwen and Smith acknowledge that there is more uranium ore to be discovered, and that there are massive quantities of uranium in the ground, but argue that the quality of the ore remaining after 60 years of further extraction is likely to be too poor to yield a positive TREI.38 We have, then, two rather similar estimates – 70 years and 60 years – but one of them then adds prognosticated and speculative reserves to give us 270 years supply at current rates; the other sees no evidence that the prognosticated and speculative reserves would in fact give us a positive TREI. Does this leave us in total confusion as to which to believe? Not quite. As we know, from experience of the parallel case of peak oil, the official agencies – in the case of oil, the United States Geological Survey and the International Energy Agency – have a strong and now widely acknowledged tendency for massive bias towards exaggerating future prospects. 39 Prognosticated and speculative reserves, if they exist, will be deep below the surface, requiring very large investments of time, capital and energy before they can be exploited. Those speculative resources – which the NEA hopes will one day becomes usable reserves – will need to be remarkably rich, relative to the vast deposits of very low-grade and useless ore of which we are already aware. That is, we know enough to err on the safe side and stick to the demonstrable 60-70-year estimate of remaining ore with a positive TREI, on which the NEA and Storm van Leeuwen and Smith are agreed... ... and yet, let us look again at what that 60/70-year estimate really means. Both the NEA and the Storm van Leeuwen and Smith estimates contain assumptions which tend to exaggerate the time remaining before depletion. First, both estimates are “reserves-to-production ratios” – current reserves simply divided by current annual production, which gives the misleading impression that production can continue at a constant rate before coming to an abrupt stop. In fact, it is well understood that, after reaching a peak well before the artificial cut-off point given by the reserves-to-production ratio, production of a resource in its latter years takes its time to decline towards zero; it is in the years closely following the peak that the trouble starts, not in the year when production finally comes to a stop. Secondly, the growth in demand for uranium which the nuclear industry seems to expect would, in any case, foreshorten the whole sequence: if 70 years is a relevant guideline for the creation of reserves if usage remains constant, a likely cut-off point on the assumption of increasing demand is probably closer to 35 years. Thirdly, both estimates are of the TREI limits, not the much earlier turning-point to negative PREI. These three factors bring forward the period during which deep deficits in uranium supply can be expected, to the decade 2011-2020. And, indeed, there is a widely-shared recognition that there will be a severe shortage of uranium around 2013. This is frankly acknowledged by the NEA itself, and set in context by the First Uranium Corporation.40 Here are the reasons (remember that the numbers are approximations). At present, about 65,000 tons of natural uranium are consumed each year in nuclear reactors worldwide.41 The number of reactors in existence in 2013 will be the product of (1) retirements of old reactors and (2) startups of new ones. There is no basis for a reliable estimate of what that net number will be, so we will assume that there is no change from the present.42 About 40,000 tons of this total demand of 65,000 tons are supplied from uranium mines, which leaves the remaining 25,000 tons to be supplied from other sources.43 10,000 tons comes from “military uranium” – that is, from the highly-enriched uranium salvaged from nuclear weapons, chiefly from the arsenal which the Soviet Union built up during the Cold War, and which is now being dismantled with the help of subsidies from the United States. The remaining 15,000 tons comes from a range of “secondary supplies”, consisting of inventories of uranium fuel that have been built up in the past, together with recycled mine tailings and some mixed-oxide fuel (MOX), a mixture of recycled plutonium and depleted uranium.44 The expectation is that neither of these crucial supplements to mined uranium have much longer to last. Military uranium is being depleted rapidly. At present, it is sold to the United States by Russia on a supply contract which expires in 2013. It is a blend of highly-enriched uranium (HEU) and low-enriched uranium (LEU), and it is supplied in the form of uranium hexafluoride. The deal is attractive to the United States, which not only gets an invaluable supply of nuclear fuel, but does not have to worry about disposing of the waste that arises in the enrichment process; it is, however, becoming less attractive to Russia, which needs all the fuel it can get for its own expanding nuclear program, and Russia is in any case getting towards to the end of her supply of obsolete nuclear warheads. There is no chance of the contract being renewed beyond 2013.45 Secondary supplies are also in decline. The inventories are approaching exhaustion, and this has been one of the drivers of the recent sharp rise in the price of uranium.46 The amount of uranium derived from tailings has been falling, and it has been calculated that the scale of the task of increasing production of uranium-235 now would require arrays of continuously-operating gas centrifuge plants running into the millions.47 The supply of MOX fuel, derived from a reprocessing which is already at its practical limits, is not expected to increase. Although several of the medium-sized producers have in recent years roughly maintained their output, or slightly increased it – notably Kazakhstan, Namibia, Niger and Russia – the world’s two largest producers – Canada and Australia – both show some evidence of being in  recent decline, with uranium production falling by (respectively), 15 and 20 percent in 2005-2006.50 In both cases, hopes for expanding production have been pinned on major new projects – the new Cigar Lake mine in Canada, and the expansion of Olympic Dam in Australia. Cigar Lake is designed to produce nearly 7,000 tons per annum, and it was due to start in 2007. However, in October 2006, it flooded; the probable way of containing the water in the sandstone above the workings is by refrigeration, which will require large inputs of energy even before work can begin. It is now uncertain whether, even after long past and future delays, Cigar Lake will ever be a substantial source of uranium.51 The contribution of Olympic Dam is in some ways even more dubious. At present, it is an underground mine well past its maturity, and the management, BHP Billiton, is considering whether to move to an adjacent ore body with an open pit mine on a massive scale. The new mine would be three kilometers in diameter and one kilometer deep, with some 350 metres of rock overburden to be removed in order to get at the ore. The problem is that the uranium ore is very low-grade – only 0.06 percent and less, with an average of 0.029 percent, so that it would be uneconomic in money terms if it were not for the copper, gold and silver which the rock also contains. But that itself is a mixed blessing because it means that the copper is contaminated with small quantities of uranium, which has to be removed in a smelter constructed in the Australian desert, adding even greater energy-costs to the final energy yield.52 Doubts as to whether Olympic Dam is capable of yielding uranium with a positive energy balance are increased by a recent study by Storm van Leeuwen, who suggests that the energy return on the energy invested in the mine is only marginally better than that of gas. Moreover, the removal of 350 metres of overburden, followed by the milling of low-grade ore would require Australia to import diesel oil with an energy content not far short of the final energy-yield of the uranium it would produce. High oil prices, aggravated by actual outages in oil supplies as the effects of the oil peak mature, would cause problems for a project for which a large and reliable flow of diesel would have to be guaranteed. Moreover, the mine is in an area of extreme drought: even if it does supply its own water by desalinating seawater, it is possible that the needs of agriculture will have a prior claim on South Australia’s water resources.53 The BHP Billiton board has not yet made the final decision whether to go ahead, but the independent nuclear energy analyst John Busby concludes that it is “unlikely”, and that, even if it did, uranium production would “certainly” be closer to 5,000 tons per annum than to the 15,000 tons which was originally planned.54 On this evidence is seems probable that, far from expanding in order to sustain the flow of energy following the oil peak, the nuclear industry will indeed begin to falter during the decade 2010-2019, with some nuclear reactors being closed down for lack of fuel, and some of the reactors now in the planning stage and under construction remaining unused indefinitely. In the light of this, a judgment has to be made as to whether hopes of a revival of uranium supply are a sufficiently realistic foundation on which to base expectations that the nuclear industry has a long-term future as a major energy provider. Even the NEA hedges its bets about this. Readers are invited to read the following two sentences from the Executive Summary with care and to decide for themselves whether they are reassured that the uranium needed to fuel the industry’s recovery after the coming shortfall will in fact be available: The long lead-times needed to bring resources into production continues to underscore the importance of making timely decisions to increase production capability well in advance of any supply shortfall. Improved information on the nature and extent of world uranium inventories and other secondary sources would improve the accuracy of the forecasting required to make these timely production decisions.55 And this brings us to the critical question of whether there will be enough uranium to provide the energy to clear up the nuclear industry’s own accumulated waste. Can the industry supply the energy to clear its own waste? First of all, we need some definitions. We can define the “net” energy produced by the nuclear industry as the electricity generated minus “front-end” energy – the energy needed to build reactors, to mine, mill, enrich and prepare the fuel, and to carry out all the other energy-using tasks needed to produce nuclear energy. “Back-end” energy – the energy needed to clear up all the wastes produced at each stage of the front-end processes, including the disposal of old reactors – is of two kinds: (1) the energy needed to dispose of the new waste – that is, the waste produced in the future, and (2) the energy needed to dispose of the whole backlog which has accumulated since the nuclear industry started-up in the 1950s. Back-end energy is the combined total of both of these.56 Most of the energy needed for these front-end and back-end processes actually comes from derivatives of fossil fuels such as diesel oil to power mining and milling machines, and coal or gas to make steel and concrete. But it is the total energy balance that matters, not the question of which source of energy will be needed for any particular part of the nuclear cycle, so it makes sense to think of all the front-end and back-end energy needs as if they were supplied from nuclear electricity. This means that some of the energy produced by nuclear reactors will not actually be available for sale because it will be required for those processes. To keep the explanation simple and in round numbers, we will use the estimate that the industry has another 60 years during which it could in practice sustain current rates of extraction, getting more energy out of the entire process than it puts into it – a positive PREI. Remember that, for reasons explained above, this is an optimistic estimate, and the implications of other estimates will be discussed in chapter 6. But, for now, let us call 60 years the “nominal” estimate and use it to help us concentrate on the principles: The first question to ask is, “How long would the industry be able to sustain its current output if the front-end energy costs had to be met out of the electricity generated by nuclear reactors?” Well, this varies with circumstances but, as an approximate guideline, the front-end processes require about one quarter of the gross energy output of nuclear reactors, so the answer to this question is: three quarters of 60 years – that is, about 45 years.57 Now we come to the back-end processes: the energy cost of disposing of the 60 years-worth of new waste is approximately the same as that of the front end – that is, about one quarter of the gross output, or 15 years of energy supply, so that brings the supply of available energy down to 30 years. But then there is still the backlog – the 60 years-worth of waste produced since 1950, and dealing with this will this require yet another 15 years of energy supply. That brings us finally down to the amount of energy we have available for use in the grid: 15 years. In other words, even if the industry really had 60 years’ supply of uranium left for its use, it would only have some fifteen years left before the decisive moment; from that turning-point, its entire net output of energy would have to be used for the essential task of getting rid of its stockpile of wastes, plus the wastes produced in the future.58 If, in its attempt to supply as much energy as possible, the industry were to postpone the task for more than that fifteen years, it would become energy-bankrupt: it would owe more energy to the planet than it could generate: it would never be able to produce enough net energy to dispose of its life-time waste. This means that, even if the nominal estimate of 60 years were correct, the industry would face a turning-point to energy bankruptcy in about 2025. The task of clearing up the remaining waste – the alternative to converting the planet into an open-plan waste-dump – is non-negotiable. The time we have left in which to do it depends on how much uranium with a positive PREI remains – and the short time we have left, even if there is as much as sixty years’ supply remaining, is set in context with other estimates, both shorter and longer, in chapter 6. Meanwhile, we should not forget the money-cost of this. If the nuclear industry in the second half of its nominal 120-year whole-life span (1950-2070) were to commit itself (as it must) to the cost of clearing up its current and future waste, any electricity left over and available for sale would become exceedingly expensive, and the industry would soon reach the point at which it had no spare energy to sell anyway. Meanwhile, governments will have to keep the clear-up program going well into the future, whatever the other priorities. They will probably have to buy-in much of the needed net energy from other sources, at which point, of course, the industry will change from being a net supplier of energy to being a net consumer. And yet, in an energy-strapped society, the non-nuclear energy needed to dispose of the nuclear industry’s legacy will be hard to find. The prospect is opening up of massive stocks of unstable wastes which – since the energy is lacking – are impossible to clear up. Nuclear energy is therefore caught in a depletion trap – the depletion of rich uranium ore, on a timescale similar to that of oil and gas. So, the question to be asked is: as the conventional uranium sources run low, are there alternative sources of fuel for nuclear energy? At this point, the natural thing to do is to turn to James Lovelock’s robust dismissal of the idea that the growth of nuclear power is likely to be constrained by depletion of its raw material. This is how he deals with it: Another flawed idea now circulating is that the world supply of uranium is so small that its use for energy would last only a few years. It is true that if the whole world chose to use uranium as its sole fuel, supplies of easily mined uranium would soon be exhausted. But there is a superabundance of low-grade uranium ore: most granite, for example, contains enough uranium to make its fuel capacity five times that of an equal mass of coal. India is already preparing to use its abundant supplies of thorium, an alternative fuel, in place of uranium.59 Lovelock also urges that we have a readily-available stock of fuel in the plutonium that has been accumulated from the reactors that are shortly to be decommissioned. And he might have added that other candidates as sources of nuclear fuel are seawater and phosphates. So, if we put the supposed alternatives to uranium ore in order, this is what we have: (1) granite; (2) fast-breeder reactors using (a) plutonium and (b) thorium; (3) seawater; and (4) phosphates. Granite It has already been explained above that granite with a uranium content of less than 0.02 percent cannot be used as a source of nuclear energy, because that is the borderline at which the energy needed to sustain the whole nuclear energy life-cycle is greater – and in the case of even poorer ores, much greater – than the energy that comes back. But Lovelock is so insistent and confident on this point that it is worth revisiting. Storm van Leeuwen, basing his calculations on his joint published work with Smith, considers how much granite would be needed to supply a 1 GW nuclear reactor with the 200 tons of natural uranium needed as a fuel source for a year’s full-power electricity production. Ordinary granite contains roughly four grams of uranium per tonne of granite (4 ppm or 0.0004 percent). One year’s supply of uranium extracted from this granite would require 100 million tons of granite (assuming, very optimistically, that you can get the granite to yield as much as half the uranium it contains). So, Lovelock’s granite could indeed be used to provide power for a nuclear reactor, but there are snags. The minor one is that it would leave a heap of granite tailings (if neatly stacked) 100 metres high, 100 metres wide and 4 kilometers long. The major snag is that the extraction process would require some 650 PJ (a petajoule = 1,000,000 billion joules) energy to produce the 26 PJ electricity provided by the reactor. That is, the process would use up some 25 times more energy that the reactor produced.60 As for the comparison between granite and coal: well, a 1 GW coal-fired power station needs about 2 million tons of coal to keep it going for a year, compared with 100 million tons of granite. Far from the practically-available fuel capacity of a tonne of granite being five times that of a tonne coal, it is 50 times less. Lovelock’s calculation is adrift by a multiple of around 250. Fast breeder reactors (a) Plutonium Lovelock’s proposal that we should use plutonium as the fuel for the nuclear power stations of the future can be taken in either of two ways. He might be suggesting that we could simply run the reactors on plutonium on the conventional “once-through” system which is standard, using light-water reactors. It is debatable whether this can be done; it has never been attempted, and it would involve a significantly different process, including the use of a different moderator. A more plausible approach would be to use it in some kind of combination with uranium – but then it is not solving the problem of uranium becoming scarce, and the very small contribution (2 per cent) which has been successfully reprocessed from spent fuel into mixed oxides (MOX) shows that this is not going to be a replacement for uranium. There are about 240 tons of plutonium in the world held in stock for civilian use. In principle, this could be increased from two sources; (a) the ex-weapons plutonium (about 150-200 tons); and (b) from the plutonium in spent fuel – but the problem here is that extracting it adds yet another layer of difficulty to the aim of a smoothly-running commercial operation for fast-breeders. The UK’s extraction plant, Thorp, has closed down after a massive leak and is unlikely to be reopened; extraction of plutonium is done to some extent in France, Russia, Japan and India, but it is such a tricky process that the United States has made it illegal.61 But breeding is a potentially attractive technology. Let us suppose, then, that the best estimate for the amount of available plutonium in the world is 240 tons, and that there is enough uranium or MOX around to use it in reactors. You don’t get many functioning reactors for that. The UK’s stocks of 106 tons, along with MOX, would be enough to fuel just two reactors for their lifetime (so there would be enough for four reactors worldwide). Then, at the end of their life (say, 24 full-power years), the plutonium would have been used up; they would then be closed down and not replaced, because at that time there will be no uranium left to fuel them, apart perhaps from very small quantities of MOX. This would scarcely be a useful strategy, so it is more sensible to suppose that Lovelock has in mind the second possibility: that the plutonium reactors should be breeder reactors, designed not just to produce electricity now, but to breed more plutonium for the future. Breeders are in principle a very attractive technology. In uranium ore, a mere 0.7 percent of the uranium content consists of the useful isotope – the one that is fissile and produces energy – uranium-235. Most of the rest consists of uranium-238, and most of that simply gets in the way and has to be dumped at the end; it is uranium-238 which is responsible for much of the awesome mixture of radioactive materials that causes the waste problem. And yet, uranium-238, as we saw in the introduction, also has the property of being fertile. When bombarded by neutrons from a “start-up” fuel like uranium-235 or plutonium-239, it can absorb a neutron to become uranium-239, which quickly decays to neptunium-239 and then to plutonium-239. This means that plutonium-239 can be used as a start-up fuel to breed more plutonium-239, more-or-less indefinitely. That’s where the claim that nuclear power would one day be too cheap to meter comes from. The Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) suggest that if all available sources of ore are exploited, and fast-breeder reactors perfected and developed, we may look forward to 20,000 years of nuclear energy at current rates of output.62 But there is a catch. It is a complicated technology. It consists of three operations: breeding, reprocessing and fuel fabrication, all of which have to work concurrently and smoothly. First, breeding: this does not simply convert uranium-238 to plutonium239; at the same time, it breeds plutonium-241, americium, curium, rhodium, technetium, palladium and much else. This fiercely radioactive mixture tends to clog up and corrode the equipment. There are in principle ways round these problems, but a smoothly-running breeding process on a commercial scale has never yet been achieved.63 Secondly, reprocessing. The mixture of radioactive products that comes out of the breeding process has to be sorted, with the plutonium-239 being extracted. The mixture itself is highly radioactive, and tends to degrade the solvent, tributyl phosphate. Here, too, insoluble compounds form, clogging up the equipment; there is some debate about how great the danger is of plutonium accumulating into a critical mass, and setting off a nuclear explosion. The mixture gets hot and releases radioactive gases; and significant quantities of the plutonium and uranium are lost as waste. As in the case of the breeder operation itself, smoothly-running reprocessing on a commercial scale has never yet been achieved. The third operation is to fabricate the recovered plutonium as fuel. The mixture gives off a great deal of gamma and alpha radiation, so the whole process of forming the fuel into rods which can then be put back into a reactor has to be done by remote control. This, too, has yet to be achieved as a smoothly-running commercial operation. And, of course, it follows that the whole fast-breeder cycle, consisting of three processes none of which have ever worked as intended, has itself never worked. There are three fast-breeder reactors in the world: Beloyarsk-3 in Russia, Monju in Japan and Phénix in France; Monju and Phénix have long been out of operation; Beloyarsk is still operating, but it has never bred. But let us look on the bright side of all this. Suppose that, with 30 years of intensive research and development, the world’s nuclear energy industry could find a use for all the reactor-grade plutonium in existence, and fabricate it into fuel rods. You can see straight away how seductive this technology is because when plutonium is used in fast breeders, wrapped in large “blankets” of uranium-238, you need (in theory) just three tons of plutonium to drive the process along, so you could (in theory) start up 80 fast-breeder reactors at the same time. So, they start breeding in 2035. But the process is not as fast as the name suggests (“fast” refers to the speeds needed at the subatomic level, rather than the speed of the process), and the outcome is by no means certain; but let us give the technology the benefit of the doubt: everything goes according to plan. Forty years later, each breeder reactor would have bred enough plutonium to replace itself and to start up another one. With the benefit of these magical assumptions becoming reality, by 2075 – long after reaching the depths of the coming energy famine – we would have 160 breeder reactors in place worldwide (there are 439 nuclear reactors in operation now). And that is all we would have, because the ordinary, uranium-235-based reactors would by then be out of fuel. Thorium The other way of breeding fuel is to use thorium. Thorium is a metal found in most rocks and soils, and there are some rich ores bearing as much as 10 percent thorium oxide. The relevant isotope is the slightly radioactive thorium-232. It has a half-life three times that of the earth, so that makes it useless as a direct source of energy, but it can be used as the starting-point from which to breed an efficient nuclear fuel. Here’s how: o Start by irradiating the thorium-232, using a start-up fuel – plutonium239 will do it. Thorium-232 is slightly fertile, and absorbs a neutron to become thorium-233.  The thorium-233, with a half-life of 22.2 minutes, decays to protactinium-233. The protactinium-233, with a half-life of 27 days, decays into uranium233. The uranium-233 is highly fissile, and can be used not just as nuclear fuel, but as the start-up source of irradiation for a blanket of thorium 232, to keep the whole cycle going indefinitely. 66 But, as is so often the case with nuclear power, it is not as good as it looks. The two-step sequence of plutonium-breeding is, as we have seen, hard enough. The four-step sequence of thorium-breeding is worse. The uranium-233 which you get at the end of the process is contaminated with uranium-232 and with highly-radioactive thorium-228, both of which are neutron-emitters, reducing its effectiveness as a fuel; it also has the disadvantage that it can be used in nuclear weapons. The comparatively long half-life of protactinium-233 (27 days) makes for problems in the reactor, since substantial quantities linger on for up to a year. Some reactors – including Kakrapar-1 and -2 in India – have both achieved full power using some thorium in their operation, and it may well be that, if there is to be a very long-term future for nuclear fission, it will be thorium that drives it along. And yet, the full thorium breeding cycle, working on a scale which is large-enough and reliable-enough to be commercial, is a long way away. 232, to keep the whole cycle going indefinitely. 66 But, as is so often the case with nuclear power, it is not as good as it looks. The two-step sequence of plutonium-breeding is, as we have seen, hard enough. The four-step sequence of thorium-breeding is worse. The uranium-233 which you get at the end of the process is contaminated with uranium-232 and with highly-radioactive thorium-228, both of which are neutron-emitters, reducing its effectiveness as a fuel; it also has the disadvantage that it can be used in nuclear weapons. The comparatively long half-life of protactinium-233 (27 days) makes for problems in the reactor, since substantial quantities linger on for up to a year. Some reactors – including Kakrapar-1 and -2 in India – have both achieved full power using some thorium in their operation, and it may well be that, if there is to be a very long-term future for nuclear fission, it will be thorium that drives it along. And yet, the full thorium breeding cycle, working on a scale which is large-enough and reliable-enough to be commercial, is a long way away. And even if that day does come, its contribution, for the foreseeable future, will be tiny. This is because it has to begin with some start-up fuel – a source of neutrons to get the whole thing going. That could come in any of three forms. It could come from uranium-235, which is going to be scarce, but there could perhaps be a case for using some in a breeder, even if the process for the first generation of reactors used more energy than it generated. Or, it could come from plutonium, but (a) there isn’t very much of that around either; (b) what there is (especially if we are going to do what Lovelock urges) is going to be busy as the fuel for once through reactors and/or fast-breeder reactors, as explained above; and (c) it is advisable, wherever there is an alternative, to keep plutonium-239 and uranium-233 – an unpredictable mixture – as separate as possible. The third, and ideal, option is uranium-233, the final fuel produced by the thorium cycle, but the problem here is that it doesn’t exist until the cycle is complete, so it can’t be used to start it. But let’s suppose that enough uranium-235 or plutonium-239 were made available to provide a full load for one reactor and to keep it going for its lifetime. There is no good foundation for forecasting the rate of growth but, taking account of all the assumptions about technical solutions that are intrinsic to this subject, there is the possibility that by 2075 there could be two thorium-cycle breeder reactors delivering energy to the grid Seawater contains uranium in a concentration of about thirty parts per billion, and advocates of nuclear power are right to say that, if this could be used, then nuclear power could in principle supply us with the energy we need for a long time to come. Ways of extracting those minute quantities of uranium from seawater and concentrating them into uranium oxide have been worked out in some detail. First of all, uranium ions are attracted – “adsorbed” – onto adsorption beds consisting of a suitable material such as titanium hydroxide, and there are also some polymers with the right properties. These beds must be suspended in the sea in huge arrays, many kilometers in length, in places where there is a current to wash the seawater through them, and where the sea is sufficiently warm – at least 20°C. They must then be lifted out of the sea and taken on-shore, where, in the first stage of the process, they are cleansed to remove organic materials and organisms. Stage two consists of “desorption” – separating the adsorbed uranium ions from the beds. Thirdly, the solution that results from this must be purified, removing the other compounds that have accumulated in much higher concentration than the uranium ions. Fourthly, the solution is concentrated, and fifthly, a solvent is used to extract the uranium. The sixth stage is to concentrate the uranium and purify it into uranium oxide (yellowcake), ready for enrichment in the usual way.69 But the operation is massive and takes a lot of energy. Very roughly, two cubic kilometers of sea water is needed to yield enough natural uranium to supply one tonne of fuel, prepared and ready for action in a reactor. A 1 GW reactor needs about 200 tons of natural uranium for one full power year, so each reactor would require some 400 cubic kilometers of seawater to be processed – that is 40,000 cubic kilometers of seawater being processed in order to keep a useful fleet of 100 nuclear reactors in business for one (full-power) year.70 And what is the energy balance of all this? One tonne of natural uranium is needed to produce to produce approximately 160 TJ (1 terajoule = 1,000 billion joules), less the energy costs of the front-end processes (defined in chapter 3) – giving a net electricity yield of some 120 TJ, while the back-end processes have to come out of that. The energy needed to supply the uranium from seawater, ready for entry into that fuel cycle, is in the region of 195-250 TJ, so that the use of seawater as a source of energy would require more energy than it could produce. The claims for phosphates as a source of uranium are impressive. The Red Book published by the NEA and the IAEA concludes that, by including phosphates as a uranium source, their already high estimate for the supply of uranium, including prognosticated resources (275 years at current rates) could be more than doubled to 675 years.71 The first thing to note is that the process of extraction is difficult. The phosphate ores are used to produce phosphoric acid, which is then concentrated in uranium, a process which requires solvents including toxic organophosphate compounds, and produces organofluorophosphorus and greenhouse gases in the form of fluorohydrocarbons.72 And then there is the even deeper problem of supply. Phosphates are, at best, a poor source of uranium. The largest deposits contain uranium ore concentrations of between 0.007 percent and 0.023 percent; they average around 0.01 percent.73 That is to say, this is a low-grade uranium ore, giving a negative PREI. Moreover, there is now increasing concern that the production of phosphates, which are an essential requirement for agriculture too, is close to its peak, and is poised for the decline characteristic of a depleting resource.74 The ultimate, iconic error for a society in trouble is to “eat its seed corn”. The evidence so far suggests that the use of phosphates as a source of the uranium for nuclear fuel would be like burning it. If we bring the above brief review of alternative sources of uranium together with the analysis of chapter 3, it is reasonable to conclude that, even if the nuclear industry presented no other problems, “peak uranium” would rule out the prospect of the nuclear industry being in any way an answer to “peak oil”, and to scarcities of gas and coal. It is now decision-time for many nations confronting the fierce certainty of climate change, the depletion of oil and gas, and the ageing of their nuclear reactors. Why should the decision-makers take any notice of this analysis, written from a global perspective? Well, one of the problems is that it is not a decision that can be made in isolation. Nuclear power could in theory be sustained by a few individual nations: they could perhaps export their wastes, and reduced competition for rich ores would mean that the supply of uranium could be spun out for a long time. So, for an individual nation looking at the choice in isolation, the nuclear option may seem to be attractive. But there is a “fallacy of composition” here: an option that is available to one cannot be supposed to be available to many; on the contrary, it is only available to the one because it is not adopted by many – and if it is adopted by many, then everyone is in trouble, deep trouble. The priority for the nuclear industry now should be to use the electricity generated by nuclear power to clean up its own pollution and to phase itself out before events force it to close down abruptly. Contrary to what you might think, given the huge scale of its problems and its supposed status as a fallback position which could solve our energy problems the nuclear energy industry is small, providing a mere 2½ percent of the world’s final energy demand.75 Nuclear power is not a solution to the energy famine brought on by the decline of oil and gas. Nor is it a means of reducing emissions of greenhouse gases. It cannot provide energy solutions, however much we may want it to do so. But the conclusion that the nuclear industry cannot provide the energy we need over the next three or four decades means that we have a problem. An energy gap lies before us, for two reasons. First the damage done to the self-regulating systems of the climate is already so great that we are at or near the tipping point at which global heating will get out of control, moving relentlessly but quickly towards a new equilibrium state possibly lethal to the majority of the inhabitants of the planet and to its civilizations. Secondly, we are at or near the "oil peak" at which supplies of oil and (slightly later) gas will turn down into a relentless decline with consequences on a scale comparable to those of climate change. In this situation, we have little choice. If there is any energy source at all which could operate on the scale and in the time needed to fill this energy gap, then we must take it, even if it comes with enormous disadvantages. Nuclear energy certainly has disadvantages, quite apart from the clincher problem of the depletion of its fuel. It is a source of low-level radiation which may be more dangerous than was previously thought. It is a source of high-level waste which has to be sequestered. Every stage in the process produces lethal waste, including the mining and leaching processes, the milling, the enrichment and the decommissioning. It is very expensive. It is a terrorist target and its enrichment processes are stepping stones to the production of nuclear weapons.76 And yet, so great is the need for some way of closing-off the demand for fossil fuels and filling the energy gap, and so serious are the consequences of not doing so, that Lovelock can argue that it would be better to develop nuclear energy, even with these disadvantages, than to fail to stop carbon emissions – or else fall into the energy gap and take the consequences. Lovelock writes: “We need emission-free energy sources immediately, and there is no serious contender to nuclear fission”.77 He suggests that the decision is much clarified for us if we recognize the risk of climate change for what it is, and he adds that we will not succeed in doing this if we do not in the process move beyond the intellectual analysis and, instead, feel the fear: Few, even among climate scientists and ecologists, seem yet to realize fully the potential severity, or the imminence, of catastrophic global disaster; understanding is still in the conscious mind alone and not yet the visceral reaction of fear. We lack an intuitive sense, an instinct, that tells us when Gaia is in danger.78 Lovelock’s argument is persuasive. But there are three grounds on which it is open to criticism. The nuclear fuel cycle Uranium depletion is not a “flawed idea”; it is a reality that is just a little way ahead. Lovelock’s otherwise brilliant analysis of climate change displays no knowledge of the nuclear fuel-cycle. His optimism about the feasibility of nuclear power in the future is a case of whistling in the dark. Alternative energy strategies Lovelock may underestimate the potential of the fourfold strategy which can be described as “Lean Energy”, an application of “lean thinking” – perceptive intelligence applied to systems. It consists of four aims: (1) Energy efficiency: to achieve the decisive improvements in the efficiency of energy-services made possible by the conservation and energy-saving technologies. (2) The proximity principle: to develop the potential for local provision of energy, goods and services. This major structural change, reducing the transport-dependency of goods, people and electricity, is difficult but necessary. It is achievable only incrementally, building local competence across the whole range of economics and culture. Deep reductions in travel and transport can be expected to come about rapidly and brutally as the oil market breaks down; adapting to them – and crucially, preparing for them before the event – will take longer. (3) Renewable energy: to design and build renewable energy systems to match the needs and resources of the particular place and site. (4) Tradable Energy Quotas (TEQs): to define a secure energy budget for the whole economy, involving every energy-user in the common purpose of achieving deep reductions in energy demand.79 It cannot be expected that this strategy will fill the energy gap completely, or neatly, or in time, but nor is Lovelock suggesting that nuclear energy could do so. Even if there were neither a uranium-supply problem to restrain the use of nuclear energy, nor a waste-problem, and even if it were the overriding priority for governments around the world, nuclear energy would still fall far short of filling the gap. It would be impossible to build all the nuclear power stations needed in time, and the energy required for construction and for building the mining-milling enrichment-transport systems would mean that a rapidly-growing nuclear energy industry would be using more energy than it provided throughout most of its period of growth – the more rapid the growth, the deeper the energy deficit it would cause. There are good reasons to believe that Lean Energy could do better. It would start to get results immediately. Per unit of energy-services produced, it would be about ten times cheaper. It would be flexible and sensitive to detail, making the best possible use of local conditions, skills and ingenuity. It would be able to call on the skill and cooperation of the entire population. And it would be part of an environmental and practical evolution towards reduced transport, environmental protection and strengthened local economics all coming together in a joined-up program. The oil peak Lovelock does not give enough weight to the significance of the oil peak. As this weigh in, it will establish conditions in which there is no choice but to conserve energy, whether the urgency of climate change is recognized or not. Without the oil peak to concentrate the mind, action to save the climate could be leisurely at best. With the oil peak reminding us, by repeatedly turning out the lights and stopping us filling up our cars, we will have an incentive to follow the one available option of Lean Energy with all the will and determination we can find. What appears to follow from this is a best-of-both-worlds strategy: to develop nuclear energy as far as the uranium supply allows, and at the same time to develop Lean Energy. But the problem is that the two strategies are substantially incompatible. A dash for nuclear energy would reduce the funds and other resources, and the concentrated focus, needed for Lean Energy. Nuclear energy relies on the existence of a fully powered-up grid system into which it can feed its output of electricity – but the grid itself is mainly powered by the electricity from gas-fueled power stations, so that if gas supplies were to be interrupted, the grid would (at least partially) close down, along with the nuclear reactors that feed into it; Lean Energy, on the other hand, is flexibly organized around local minigrids. Nuclear energy inevitably brings a sense of reassurance that, in the end, the technical fix will save us; Lean Energy calls on the whole range of technology from the most advanced to the most labor-intensive, along with adaptations in behavior, in the economy, in the use of land and distance, in the way food is grown and materials are used, and in the sinews and culture of society itself. Nuclear energy’s potential contribution to energy services in the future, starting from its present level of 2½ percent of final energy demand, is small; the potential for Lean Energy is at least twenty times greater. Nuclear energy is about conserving the bankrupt present; Lean Energy is about inventing and building a future that works.80 For these reasons, the best-of-both-worlds strategy of backing both nuclear energy and Lean Energy could be expected to lead to worst-of both-worlds consequences. Lean Energy would be impeded by nuclear energy; nuclear energy would be hopelessly ineffective without Lean Energy. Result: paralysis. This should not be overstated: a few token nuclear reactors to replace some of those that are about to be retired would make it much harder to develop Lean Energy with the single-minded urgency and resources needed, without necessarily ruling out progress towards it entirely. But the defining reality of the energy future has to be an acknowledgment that no large-scale technical fix is available. Energy cannot any longer be delegated to experts. The future will have to be a collective, society-transforming effort. The strategic matters discussed in chapter 5 are important, but it is the waste problem which is decisive. There is a turning-point when the nuclear industry will become energy-bankrupt, if it has not already done so. After that, it will never be able to generate the energy needed for permanent disposal of its backlog of waste, even if it diverts its whole energy output into the task. This prospect needs to be researched urgently and by more than one research centre with the authority to get at the facts, but otherwise working independently of industry or government interests. Research should also, with all speed, get evidence about the global warming and ozone impacts of uranium hexafluoride and other solvents, both in use and as leaking waste. And here is a hypothesis to which we need an answer at some speed: if the worldwide backlog of nuclear wastes were simply left to leak, catch fire and spread into the environment, the resulting levels of radiation and toxicity would in principle require the evacuation of the planet. True, or not? Waste and depletion are two aspects of the same problem. For the timing of depletion, we will consider four estimates, starting with one which suggests that the industry will not recover from the 2011-2020 outages, giving an estimate of 10 years before the industry ceases to be a significant producer of electrical power owing to depletion of uranium giving a positive practical return on energy invested (PREI). The second estimate suggests that the industry does recover from the coming outages and continues as an energy producer at roughly current rates for 30 years. Thirdly, we take the estimate discussed in chapter 3, which has a time horizon of 6o years. Fourthly, let us suppose that this present analysis is completely misguided, and that the industry will continue on its present scale for another 200 years. These estimates are now brought together with the estimates of the net energy yielded by the nuclear industry, after the costs of the front-end processes (procuring the fuel and producing energy from it) and back-end processes (dismantling reactors and dealing with wastes) are taken into account. They are summarised in the Energy Balance Sheet. We have, then, four dates for the turning-point at which the industry will never be able to supply the energy needed to get rid of its own wastes: that is, energy-bankruptcy: 2000, 2010, 2025 and 2095. o If it is 2000, the industry is already deep into its energy-bankruptcy. It will never be able to get rid of its own waste from its own resources. There is the prospect of having to call on the supplies of fossil fuel energy, at a time of deepening scarcity, to deal with the nuclear waste which the waning nuclear industry cannot clear up. If it is 2010, the whole of the energy produced by the industry over its remaining life of 30 years must be directed into clearing up its own wastes, starting now. o If it is 2025, the industry has some fifteen years before the onset of energy bankruptcy. o If it is 2095, we are looking at an industry facing, in 85 years' time, an inheritance 0f waste whose treatment will demand a flow of energy equal to some 115 years of electricity output – and with no electricity left over to sell. In other words, the greater the estimate of remaining reserves, the longer the period of energy debt. In the event of the recklessly optimistic estimate of there being 200 years uranium remaining with a positive PREI, the last 115 years of the nuclear industry’s operation would be committed to paying back its energy debt, dealing with the backlog of wastes, and with the large accumulation of its new wastes accrued during the final 200 years of its life. An energy debt on this scale is scarcely good news. Nor is the financial debt that would go with it. With some justice, the nuclear industry could point out that the task of dealing with its wastes has already started, and that high-level waste has to be allowed to cool off. An experimental deep repository for high-level waste has been excavated in Sweden; Finland has started on a real one at Olkiluoto; plans to build one in Nevada are being debated; and research is being done into ways of dealing with uranium hexafluoride. And yet, the questions of where exactly it will go, who will take responsibility for the waste held in deteriorating stockpiles in unstable regions, how to pay for it and, above all, where the energy will come from, remain unanswered. Meanwhile, the industry continues to add to the problem. And suitable sites – stable, preferably dry, and enjoying the support of the local population – are rare; the vast size of a permanent repository, the technical difficulty, the energy needed and the cost all bring this massive task of long-term disposal to the edge of what is possible. It may in fact never be possible to find a permanent resting-place for all, or even for a decent proportion, of the waste that has already been produced. The nuclear industry should therefore focus on finding solutions to the whole of its waste problem before it becomes too late to do so. And hold it right there, because this is perhaps the moment to think about what “too late” might mean. Notwithstanding the emphasis placed on depletion in this booklet, it is climate change that may well set the final date for completion of the massive and non-negotiable task of dealing with nuclear waste. Many reactors are in low-lying areas in the path of rising seas; and many of the storage ponds, crowded with high-level waste, are close by. Estimated dates for steep rises in sea levels are constantly being brought forward. With an angry climate, and whole populations on the move, it will be hard to find the energy, the funds, the skills and the orderly planning needed for a massive program of waste disposal – or even moving waste out of the way of rising tides. When outages in gas supplies lead to break down in electricity supplies, the electrical-powered cooling systems that stop high-level waste from catching fire will stop working. It will also be hard to stop ragged armies, scrambling for somewhere to live, looting spent fuel rods from unguarded dumps, attaching them to conventional explosives, and being prepared to use them. All this will have to be dealt-with, and at speed. There may be no time to wait for reactor cores and high-level wastes to cool down. But, then, it may be a frank impossibility to bury them until they have cooled down... In any event, the task of making those wastes safe should be an unconditional priority, equal to that of confronting climate change itself. The default-strategy of seeding the world with radioactive time-bombs which will pollute the oceans and detonate at random intervals for thousands of years into the future, whether there are any human beings around to care about it or not, should be recognized as off any scale calibrated in terms other than dementia. Nuclear power is the energy source that claims a significance and causes trouble far beyond the scale of the energy it produces. It is a distraction from the need to face up to the coming energy gap, to inform the public and to call on the wit and energy which is available to develop a program of Lean Energy. Of the many shortcomings in the response to energy-matters, a central one has been the failure to involve the public in doing what it could, given a chance, be good at – inventing solutions and making them happen in realistic local detail. Determined attempts are being made to rectify this (the U.K. Government’s Climate Change Communication Initiative is an example) but the construction of nuclear reactors, presented as almost carbon-free fixes for the energy problem, is not a good way of involving the public. It is only when we are free of such narcotic fallacies that there will be a commitment to the one option for which there is a prospect of success: tapping the energy of the people. We have to integrate energy, economics and society, and to enable them to develop in a way which copes with the reality of the energy gap that is now almost upon us. That calls for an effective framework which makes it clear to all of us – citizens, firms, the government, everyone – what the energy limits are now, and achieves an orderly descent to the low limits that will apply in the future. It is then up to us to bring all the skill, ingenuity and judgment we can to negotiating our way down the energy descent. We need to discover a common purpose. All this is possible if there is an appropriate framework for it, a system in which individual motivations are aligned with the collective need. There are various names for it. One of them is Tradable Energy Quotas (TEQs). We need to enable small-scale actions to build up onto a scale that gets results; we need a robust, simple, system for recruiting ingenuity and intelligence, and the common purpose to make it happen now. Such a design exists. There is a non-nuclear life-cycle ready and waiting. The US Nuclear Regulatory Commission has proposed a reduction in the frequency and scope of inspections at the country's more than 90 nuclear power units to help reduce costs and improve efficiency. In response, the Nuclear Energy Institute said "smarter regulations" can help nuclear plant owners and operators allocate time and resources to areas that most impact safety. The investigation, under Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, was triggered by the filing in January 2018 of a petition by uranium mining companies Energy Fuels Inc and Ur-Energy. In it, the companies said the loss of a viable US uranium mining industry would have a significant detrimental impact on the country's national, energy and economic security and its ability to sustain an independent nuclear fuel cycle. They sought a quota to limit imports of uranium into the USA, effectively reserving 25% of the market for domestic production, and a "buy American" policy for federal entities needing to purchase the material. Energy Fuels and Ur Energy yesterday said: "We have not seen the DOC report, which is expected to remain confidential, but we believe the facts are clear ... The once robust American uranium mining industry is disappearing because a flood of state-subsidised imports has made fair competition impossible." The presidential decision must be made by 15 July, at the latest. Wayne Heili, managing director and CEO of Peninsula Energy, said the company would in the meantime continue to focus on enhancing the production capacity and the cost effectiveness of its Lance project in Wyoming. "With the outcomes of the Section 232 investigation sitting outside of its control, we await the presidential review process and will provide further updates to the market when the outcomes of that process are known," he said. Blake Steele, president and CEO of Azarga Uranium also said the company would continue to focus on executing its corporate strategy pending any decision. "Our focus remains on advancing our initial development priority, the Dewey Burdock in-situ recovery uranium project in South Dakota," he said. Australian company Bannerman Resources Limited, which is developing the Etango uranium project in Namibia, said: "After effective lobbying by the Ad Hoc Utilities Group … a broad range of potential outcomes are seen as possible, including a decision to take no action. "The variation in scope and effect of these potential outcomes, coupled with the breadth of the discretion afforded to the White House, has created uncertainty that has resulted in most utility procurement programs being suspended or sharply curtailed." The Ad Hoc Utilities Group (AHUG), which represents US nuclear power generators, has urged the DOC to avoid placing tariffs or quotas on uranium imports. "A 25% domestic uranium quota would add USD500-800 million in annual costs to already economically challenged [nuclear power] plants in an industry that provides 100,000 direct jobs and 475,000 indirect jobs, whereas the entire mining industry employs about 400 workers," it said on 8 April. A quota would also "deplete and ultimately exhaust" US uranium resources, creating national security concerns, it said. According to Bloomberg, former US Energy Secretary Ernest Moniz reacted to the filing by saying a commodity such as uranium, which can be easily stored in large amounts, was not a "driving" concern for national security. "I have never considered uranium to be a major security issue," he said.
According to the US Energy Information Administration, 7% of the 43 million pounds U3O8 (16,540 tU) purchased for use in US nuclear power plants in 2017 - the most recent year for which data is currently available - was of US origin. US uranium production in 2018 was 564 tU according to World Nuclear Association, and is currently at its lowest since 2004. A 25% domestic uranium quota would therefore necessitate a major increase in production. The fuel assemblies were manufactured by Elektrostal Machine-Building Plant, a TVEL subsidiary located in the Moscow region. CEFR is used for research purposes, though it forms part of a 20-megawatt power unit supplying electricity to the grid, TVEL said, adding that it is classified by the International Atomic Energy Agency as the only fast power reactor in the world outside of Russia. Russian nuclear fuel supply is an "integral part" of Russian-Chinese cooperation in the development of fast reactor technology, TVEL said. As the “logical sequel” to the CEFR project, the China demonstration reactor CFR-600 is under construction in Xiapu County, in China's Fujian province. In January, TVEL and CNLY (a subsidiary of China National Nuclear Corporation) signed a contract for the supply of nuclear fuel for the CFR-600 sodium-cooled pool-type fast-neutron nuclear reactor. That fuel will be also fabricated by Elektrostal Machine-Building Plant Oleg Grigoriyev, TVEL senior vice president for commerce and international business, said cooperation with its Cnese partners was strategically significant. He noted that TVEL supplies fuel to the VVER-1000 powered units of the Tianwan nuclear power plant and it that it has localised fabrication of VVER-1000 fuel under licence at CNNC's main pressurised water reactor fuel fabrication plant at Yibin in Sichuan province, which it supplies with Russian-made fuel components. At the same time, we are negotiating fuel contracts for the new VVER-1200 power units in China, which will be constructed by Rosatom," he said. "Cooperation in fast reactor technologies, including the fuel cycle, has strategic meaning as it aims to create dual-component nuclear power generation in the future." In June last year, Russia and China signed four agreements, including for the construction of two VVER-1200 reactors as units 7 and 8 of the Tianwan plant. In addition, two VVER-1200 units are to be constructed at the new Xudabao site. In 2017 the US Court of Appeals for the 4th Circuit rejected Virginia Uranium Inc's argument that the AEA gives the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) exclusive power to regulate uranium milling and tailings-management activities and therefore pre-empts state uranium mining laws like Virginia's. The company, which wants to mine uranium from a site near Coles Hill in Virginia, then petitioned the Supreme Court to consider the ruling. The federal government also filed a brief urging the Supreme Court to take up the case. The Supreme Court in May 2018 agreed to consider the question of whether the AEA pre-empts a state law "that on its face regulates an activity within its jurisdiction" (uranium mining), but has the "purpose and effect" of regulating radiological safety hazards of activities that are the responsibility of the NRC (the milling of uranium and the management of the resulting tailings). The Supreme Court argued the case in November 2018 and has now announced it affirmed the earlier court decision. Three of the Supreme Court's nine judges dissented. The AEA generally prohibits states from regulating issues relating to radiation safety that are governed by the NRC. However Supreme Court Associate Justice Neil Gorsuch - with the concurrence of Associate Justices Clarence Thomas and Brett Kavanaugh - said the AEA "contains no provision expressly pre-empting state law", and noted that the although the AEA grants the NRC "extensive and sometimes exclusive authority to regulate nearly every aspect of the nuclear fuel life cycle except mining" it expressly states that NRC's regulatory powers arise only after uranium is mined. "If the federal government wants to control uranium mining on private land, it must purchase or seize the land by eminent domain and make it federal land," Gorsuch said. Associate Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan agreed with Gorsuch that the mining ban was not pre-empted but said his discussions on legislative motive were "well beyond the confines of this case". Virginia Uranium said yesterday it was still studying the Supreme Court's opinions, but was "obviously disappointed" with the result. "We continue to think that Virginia's uranium mining ban is both unlawful and unwise, and we are reviewing other options for challenging the Commonwealth's confiscation of Virginia Uranium's mineral estate," the company said. Daniel Deeb, an environmental partner at Chicago law company Schiff Hardin, said the main difference in opinion between the Supreme Court judges appeared to centre on the extent to which they believed courts should assess the state legislative purpose when considering pre-emption under the AEA. "The majority find AEA simply does not express pre-emption of state uranium mining laws and advise of the perils of trying to assess any hidden state legislative purpose when a state law, such as that now at issue, is far removed from core NRC powers," he said.
Deeb said the dissenting judges - Chief Justice John Roberts, Associate Justice Stephen Breyer and Associate Justice Samuel Alito - found the Virginia statute to be pre-empted by the AEA under the rationale of precedent. "Roberts' analysis is perhaps summed up by his quip: 'Under the rule adopted by the majority, so long as a state is not boneheaded enough to express its real purpose in the statute, the state will have free reign to subvert Congress's judgement on nuclear safety'," he said, quoting directly from the published opinions. The Coles Hill uranium deposit in Pittsylvania County was first discovered in 1978 and 2008 NI 43-101 figures showed it to contain measured resources of 3260 tU and indicated resources of 42,800 tU. Its owner, Virginia Energy Inc, describes it as the largest undeveloped uranium deposit in the USA. Virginia Energy's ownership in Coles Hill is held through its subsidiary, Virginia Uranium.
The United States currently has 104 operational nuclear power plants. [1] As part of the nuclear fuel cycle process, radioactive waste is produced that needs to be safely dealt with in order to avoid permanent damage to the surrounding environment. Nuclear waste can be temporarily treated on-site at the production facility using a number of methods, such as vitrification, ion exchange or synroc. Although this initial treatment prepares the waste for transport and inhibits damage in the short-term, long-term management solutions for nuclear waste lie at the crux of finding a viable solution towards more widespread adoption of nuclear power. Specific long-term management methods include geological disposal, transmutation, waste re-use, and space disposal. It is also worth noting that the half-life of certain radioactive wastes can be in the range of 500,000 years or more. Geological Disposal The process of geological disposal centers on burrowing nuclear waste into the ground to the point where it is out of human reach. There are a number of issues that can arise as a result of placing waste in the ground. The waste needs to be properly protected to stop any material from leaking out. Seepage from the waste could contaminate the water table if the burial location is above or below the water level. Furthermore, the waste needs to be properly fastened to the burial site and also structurally supported in the event of a major seismic event, which could result in immediate contamination. Also, given the half-life noted above, a huge concern centers around how feasible it would be to even assume that nuclear waste could simply lie in repository that far below the ground. Concerns regarding terrorism also arise. A noted geological disposal project that was recently pursued and could possible still be pursued in the future by the United States government is the Yucca Mountain nuclear waste repository. The federal government has voted to develop the site for future nuclear storage. Although the Obama administration has been adamant in stating that Yucca Mountain is "off the table," Congress voted by a margin of 10 to 1 in 2009 to keep funding the project as part of the federal budget. A number of concerns surround this project and the ultimate long-term viability of it are yet to be seen given the political uncertainty surrounding it. Reprocessing has also emerged as a viable long term method for dealing with waste. As the name implies, the process involves taking waste and separating the useful components from those that aren’t as useful. Specifically, it involves taking the fissionable material out from the irradiated nuclear fuel. Concerns regarding re-processing have largely focused around nuclear proliferation and how much easier re-processing would allow fissionable material to spread. Transmutation also poses a solution for long term disposal. It specifically involves converting a chemical element into another less harmful one. Common conversions include going from Chlorine to Argon or from Potassium to Argon. The driving force behind transmutation is chemical reactions that are caused from an outside stimulus, such as a proton hitting the reaction materials. Natural transmutation can also occur over a long period of time. Natural transmutation also serves as the principle force behind geological storage on the assumption that giving the waste enough isolated time will allow it to become a non-fissionable material that poses little or no risk. Space Disposal space disposal has emerged as an option, but not as a very viable one. Specifically, space disposal centers around putting nuclear waste on a space shuttle and launching the shuttle into space. This becomes a problem from both a practicality and economic standpoint as the amount of nuclear waste that could be shipped on a single shuttle would be extremely small compared to the total amount of waste that would need to be dealt with. Furthermore, the possibility of the shuttle exploding en route to space could only make the matter worse as such an explosion would only cause the nuclear waste to spread out far beyond any reasonable measure of control. The upside would center around the fact that launching the material into space would subvert any of the other issues associated with the other disposal methods as the decay of the material would occur outside of our atmosphere regardless of the half-life. Various methods exist for the disposal of nuclear waste. A combination of factors must be taken into account when assessing any one particular method. First, the volume of nuclear waste is large and needs to be accounted for. Second, the half-life of nuclear waste results in the necessity for any policymaker to view the time horizon as effectively being infinite as it is best to find a solution that will require the least intervention once a long-term plan has been adapted. Last, the sustainability of any plan needs to be understood. Reducing the fissionability of the material and dealing with adverse effects it can have on the environment and living beings needs to be fully incorporated. Ultimately, nuclear waste is a reality with nuclear power and needs to be properly addressed in order to accurately assess the long-term viability of this power source. Like all industries, the generation of electricity produces waste. Whatever fuel is used, the waste produced in generating electricity must be managed in ways that safeguard human health and minimise the impact on the environment. For radioactive waste, this means isolating or diluting it such that the rate or concentration of any radionuclides returned to the biosphere is harmless. To achieve this, practically all radioactive waste is contained and managed, with some clearly needing deep and permanent burial. From nuclear power generation, unlike all other forms of thermal electricity generation, all waste is regulated – none is allowed to cause pollution. Nuclear power is characterised by the very large amount of energy produced from a very small amount of fuel, and the amount of waste produced during this process is also relatively small. However, much of the waste produced is radioactive and therefore must be carefully managed as hazardous material. All parts of the nuclear fuel cycle produce some radioactive waste and the cost of managing and disposing of this is part of the electricity cost (i.e. it is internalised and paid for by the electricity consumers).All toxic waste needs be dealt with safely – not just radioactive waste – and in countries with nuclear power, radioactive waste comprises a very small proportion of total industrial hazardous waste generated. Radioactive waste is not unique to the nuclear fuel cycle. Radioactive materials are used extensively in medicine, agriculture, research, manufacturing, non-destructive testing, and minerals exploration. Unlike other hazardous industrial materials, however, the level of hazard of all radioactive waste – its radioactivity – diminishes with time both long-lived and short-lived components, depending on the length of time it will take for the radioactivity of particular radionuclides to decrease to levels that are considered non-hazardous for people and the surrounding environment. If generally short-lived fission products can be separated from long-lived actinides, this distinction becomes important in management and disposal of HLW.HLW is the focus of significant attention regarding nuclear power, and is managed accordingly Radioactive waste is produced at all stages of the nuclear fuel cycle – the process of producing electricity from nuclear materials. The fuel cycle involves the mining and milling of uranium ore, its processing and fabrication into nuclear fuel, its use in the reactor, its reprocessing (if conducted), the treatment of the used fuel taken from the reactor, and finally, disposal of the waste. Whilst waste is produced during mining and milling and fuel fabrication, the majority comes from the actual 'burning' of uranium to produce electricity. Where the used fuel is reprocessed, the amount of waste is reduced materially Traditional uranium mining generates fine sandy tailings, which contain virtually all the naturally occurring radioactive elements found in uranium ore. The tailings are collected in engineered dams and finally covered with a layer of clay and rock to inhibit the leakage of radon gas, and to ensure long-term stability. In the short term, the tailings material is often covered with water. After a few months, the tailings material contains about 75% of the radioactivity of the original ore. Strictly speaking these are not classified as radioactive waste. Any used fuel will still contain some of the original U-235 as well as various plutonium isotopes which have been formed inside the reactor core, and U-238. In total these account for some 96% of the original uranium and over half of the original energy content (ignoring U-238). Used nuclear fuel has long been reprocessed to extract fissile materials for recycling and to reduce the volume of HLW (see also information page on Processing of Used Nuclear Fuel). Several European countries, as well as Russia, China, and Japan have policies to reprocess used nuclear fuel. Reprocessing allows for a significant amount of plutonium to be recovered from used fuel, which is then mixed with depleted uranium oxide in a MOX fabrication plant to make fresh fuel. This process allows some 25-30% more energy to be extracted from the original uranium ore, and significantly reduces the volume of HLW (by about 85%). The IAEA estimates that of the 370,000 metric tons of heavy metal (MTHM) produced since the advent of civil nuclear power production, 120,000 MTHM has been reprocessed.1 In addition, the remaining HLW is significantly less radioactive – decaying to the same level as the original ore within 9000 years (vs. 300,000 years). (For more information, see information papers on Mixed Oxide Fuel and Processing of Used Nuclear Fuel).Commercial reprocessing plants currently operate in France, the UK, and Russia. Another is being commissioned in Japan, and China plans to construct one too. France undertakes reprocessing for utilities in other countries, and a lot of Japan’s fuel has been reprocessed there, with both waste and recycled plutonium in MOX fuel being returned to Japan. (For more information, see information paper on Japanese Waste and MOX Shipments From Europe).The main historical and current process is Purex, a hydrometallurgical process. The main prospective ones are electrometallurgical – often called pyro processing since it happens to be hot. With it, all actinide anions (notably uranium and plutonium) are recovered together. Whilst not yet operational, these technologies will result in waste that only needs 300 years to reach the same level of radioactivity as the originally mined ore. Any used fuel will still contain some of the original U-235 as well as various plutonium isotopes which have been formed inside the reactor core, and U-238. In total these account for some 96% of the original uranium and over half of the original energy content (ignoring U-238). Used nuclear fuel has long been reprocessed to extract fissile materials for recycling and to reduce the volume of HLW (see also information page on Processing of Used Nuclear Fuel). Several European countries, as well as Russia, China, and Japan have policies to reprocess used nuclear fuel. Reprocessing allows for a significant amount of plutonium to be recovered from used fuel, which is then mixed with depleted uranium oxide in a MOX fabrication plant to make fresh fuel. This process allows some 25-30% more energy to be extracted from the original uranium ore, and significantly reduces the volume of HLW (by about 85%). The IAEA estimates that of the 370,000 metric tons of heavy metal (MTHM) produced since the advent of civil nuclear power production, 120,000 MTHM has been reprocessed.1 In addition, the remaining HLW is significantly less radioactive – decaying to the same level as the original ore within 9000 years (vs. 300,000 years). (For more information, see information papers on Mixed Oxide Fuel and Processing of Used Nuclear Fuel).Commercial reprocessing plants currently operate in France, the UK, and Russia. Another is being commissioned in Japan, and China plans to construct one too. France undertakes reprocessing for utilities in other countries, and a lot of Japan’s fuel has been reprocessed there, with both waste and recycled plutonium in MOX fuel being returned to Japan. (For more information, see information paper on Japanese Waste and MOX Shipments From Europe).The main historical and current process is Purex, a hydrometallurgical process. The main prospective ones are electrometallurgical – often called pyro processing since it happens to be hot. With it, all actinide anions (notably uranium and plutonium) are recovered together. Whilst not yet operational, these technologies will result in waste that only needs 300 years to reach the same level of radioactivity as the originally mined ore. Any used fuel will still contain some of the original U-235 as well as various plutonium isotopes which have been formed inside the reactor core, and U-238. In total these account for some 96% of the original uranium and over half of the original energy content (ignoring U-238). Used nuclear fuel has long been reprocessed to extract fissile materials for recycling and to reduce the volume of HLW (see also information page on Processing of Used Nuclear Fuel). Several European countries, as well as Russia, China, and Japan have policies to reprocess used nuclear fuel. Reprocessing allows for a significant amount of plutonium to be recovered from used fuel, which is then mixed with depleted uranium oxide in a MOX fabrication plant to make fresh fuel. This process allows some 25-30% more energy to be extracted from the original uranium ore, and significantly reduces the volume of HLW (by about 85%). The IAEA estimates that of the 370,000 metric tons of heavy metal (MTHM) produced since the advent of civil nuclear power production, 120,000 MTHM has been reprocessed.1 In addition, the remaining HLW is significantly less radioactive – decaying to the same level as the original ore within 9000 years (vs. 300,000 years). (For more information, see information papers on Mixed Oxide Fuel and Processing of Used Nuclear Fuel).Commercial reprocessing plants currently operate in France, the UK, and Russia. Another is being commissioned in Japan, and China plans to construct one too. France undertakes reprocessing for utilities in other countries, and a lot of Japan’s fuel has been reprocessed there, with both waste and recycled plutonium in MOX fuel being returned to Japan. (For more information, see information paper on Japanese Waste and MOX Shipments From Europe).The main historical and current process is Purex, a hydrometallurgical process. The main prospective ones are electrometallurgical – often called pyro processing since it happens to be hot. With it, all actinide anions (notably uranium and plutonium) are recovered together. Whilst not yet operational, these technologies will result in waste that only needs 300 years to reach the same level of radioactivity as the originally mined ore. In recent years, in both the radiological protection and radioactive waste management communities, there has been increased attention on how to effectively manage non-power related nuclear waste. All countries, including those that do not have nuclear power plants, have to manage radioactive waste generated by activities unrelated to the production of nuclear energy, including national laboratory and university research activities; used and lost industrial gauges and radiography sources; and nuclear medicine activities at hospitals. Although much of this waste is not long-lived, the variety of the sources makes any general assessment of physical or radiological characteristics difficult. The relatively source-specific nature of the waste poses questions and challenges for its management at a national level. Treatment involves operations intended to change waste streams’ characteristics to improve safety or economy. Treatment techniques may involve compaction to reduce volume, filtration or ion exchange to remove radionuclide content, or precipitation to induce changes in composition. Conditioning is undertaken to change waste into a form that is suitable for safe handling, transportation, storage, and disposal. This step typically involves the immobilisation of waste in containers. Liquid LLW and ILW are typically solidified in cement, whilst HLW is calcined/dried then vitrified in a glass matrix. Immobilised waste will be placed in a container suitable for its characteristics Storage of waste may take place at any stage during the management process. Storage involves maintaining the waste in a manner such that it is retrievable, whilst ensuring it is isolated from the external environment. Waste may be stored to make the next stage of management easier (for example, by allowing its natural radioactivity to decay). Storage facilities are commonly onsite at the power plant, but may be also be separate from the facility where it was produced. Disposal of waste takes place when there is no further foreseeable use for it, and in the case of HLW, when radioactivity has decayed to relatively low levels after about 40-50 years. Some low-level liquid waste from reprocessing plants is discharged to the sea. This includes radionuclides which are distinctive, notably technetium-99 (sometimes used as a tracer in environmental studies), and this can be discerned many hundred kilometers away. However, such discharges are regulated and controlled, and the maximum radiation dose anyone receives from them is a small fraction of natural background radiation. Nuclear power stations and reprocessing plants release small quantities of radioactive gases (e.g. krypton-85 and xenon-133) and trace amounts of iodine-131 to the atmosphere. However, krypton-85 and xenon-133 are chemically inert, all three gases have short half-lives, and the radioactivity in the emissions is diminished by delaying their release. The net effect is too small to warrant consideration in any life-cycle analysis. A little tritium is also produced but regulators do not consider its release to be significant. Storage ponds at reactors, and those at centralised facilities such as CLAB in Sweden, are 7-12 metres deep to allow for several metres of water over the used fuel (assembled in racks typically about 4 metres long and standing on end). The multiple racks are made of metal with neutron absorbers incorporated. The circulating water both shields and cools the fuel. These pools are robust constructions made of thick reinforced concrete with steel liners. Ponds at reactors are often designed to hold all the used fuel produced over the planned operating lifetime of the reactor Nuclear power is the only large-scale energy-producing technology that takes full responsibility for all its waste and fully costs this into the product. Financial provisions are made for managing all kinds of civilian radioactive waste. The cost of managing and disposing of nuclear power plant waste typically represents about 5% of the total cost of the electricity generated. The volume of high-level radioactive waste (HLW) produced by the civil nuclear industry is small. The IAEA estimates that 370,000 tons of heavy metal (tHM) in the form of used fuel have been discharged since the first nuclear power plants commenced operation. Of this, the agency estimates that 120,000 tHM have been reprocessed. The IAEA estimates that the disposal volume of the current solid HLW inventory is approximately 22,000m3.1 For context, this is a volume roughly equivalent to a three metre tall building covering an area the size of a soccer pitch Nuclear waste disposal is extremely hazardous and is often an argument against the use of nuclear reactors. The main objective in disposing off nuclear waste is too protecting people and the environment. To make sure that it doesn’t produce harmful radiations, practically all wastes are contained and managed – some clearly need deep and permanent burial. Broadly, there are couple of options to safely dispose off nuclear waste i.e. deep geologic storage and recycling. This is the waste that remains when nuclear fuel is used to make energy via a nuclear reactor. Because the fuel has been used, the waste takes the form of small pellets and fuel rods. This in-between level of radioactive waste is typically inclusive of materials that need to be properly stored away from land or human exposure, but doesn’t need to go through a cooling process before doing so. Oftentimes decommissioned nuclear plants have this level of radioactivity, and waste is typically handled depending on the time it takes for the radioactivity to decay This in-between level of radioactive waste is typically inclusive of materials that need to be properly stored away from land or human exposure, but doesn’t need to go through a cooling process before doing so. Oftentimes decommissioned nuclear plants have this level of radioactivity, and waste is typically handled depending on the time it takes for the radioactivity to decay Nuclear materials – particularly thorium and uranium – come from a special process of extraction used to remove them from naturally occurring ore. Mill tailings are the forms of residue produced during this extraction process While you can throw your household waste into a garbage can that makes its way to a landfill, other types of waste – such as the by products from nuclear activity – must be disposed of in a very carefully regimented way. Your old magazines may sit in that landfill for a while, but if you were to throw out nuclear or radioactive waste in the same way, it would simply enter the air, ground, and water supply, leading to serious harm to local residents and wildlife. That’s why nuclear waste disposal is such an important factor in keeping the environment stable. Because nuclear waste consists of radioactive materials, it must be properly disposed of or there is a risk of a larger contamination. Many governments have specific regulating agencies that provide strict procedures for those handling nuclear materials. Proper nuclear waste is important, as it can take hundreds of years for the material to lose its radioactivity. During this process, remnants of radioactivity can and will affect many people, animals, and plants in a given region Humans are significantly impacted by exposure to levels of radiation. Oftentimes, this exposure will affect many future generations, as it leads to a number of birth and developmental disabilities. Down syndrome, thyroid cancer, and a number of other issues have been found in people affected by radiation. One only need look to the Chernobyl disaster to see what the effects of radiation can be on wildlife in the area. Unfortunately, despite the fact that the event was 30 years ago, most of the animals are deemed to be affected by radioactivity. This manifests in reduced brain sizes, physical deformities, and other concerns that impact the survival of these creatures. Plant life is also susceptible to damage from nuclear radioactive waste. After Chernobyl, an entire pine forest needed to be destroyed because it was affected by radiation. Not to mention, radioactive soils and plants dissuade bees and other important creatures from fertilizing and helping flora grow, which again, serves to impact future generations. It goes without saying that those who work around nuclear materials are highly susceptible to negative effects. While rare, nuclear reactor accidents have led to many deaths in the past, both from those exposed and even some of whom were irradiated during the research or testing phases. Improperly stored waste at a nuclear site can also lead to levels of exposure that are beyond what is acceptable for humans. One of the most recent goals with nuclear waste is to try and reduce the overall amount produced. Mostly, these recommendations take the form of being careful where and how radioactive materials are handled, and using the least amount of nuclear materials possible to do the job needed. However, when it comes to properly disposing nuclear waste, from low-level to high level, there are certain standard types of making sure it is handled and irradiated properly. Over time, the radioactivity of nuclear material does decay, so storing this material until it is no longer radioactive is another way to deal with proper nuclear waste disposal. This process, called radioactive decay, depends on the amount of materials and the radioactivity level. Therefore, storage is typically only done with radioactive waste that has a shorter half-life, or the amount of time it takes for the material’s radioactivity to be reduced by half. There are commercial storage facilities for this waste, while some approved companies have their own means of storage. Highly radioactive material is hard to bury, but when it comes to mill tailings, these remnants can often be buried in a specially-crafted spot nearby the mill itself. Often, this includes creating a pile of tailings, covering it with a non-permeable material like clay. The pile is often typically buttressed by a mix of rocks and soil so that it doesn’t erode. While shallow burials can be done with low-level waste, the most common way of disposing of high-level waste is in deep burial pits. Many countries with natural resources follow this procedure of geological disposal, which consists of burying the material deep within the earth. Oftentimes, underground laboratories are built to monitor usage and storage of the materials. However, as of now, there is no government that has a facility for this type of disposal, although one is being created in Finland. At nuclear sites, a common way of storing material is in water. Nearly all of these sites have a special pond or have a special pool constructed, which is a place that they can store fuel that has already been used for the process of generating power. Radioactive waste is waste that contains radioactive material. Radioactive waste is usually a by-product of nuclear power generation and other applications of nuclear fission or nuclear technology, such as research and medicine. Radioactive waste is hazardous to most forms of life and the environment, and is regulated by government agencies in order to protect human health and the environment. Radioactivity naturally decays over time, so radioactive waste has to be isolated and confined in appropriate disposal facilities for a sufficient period until it no longer poses a threat. The time radioactive waste must be stored for depends on the type of waste and radioactive isotopes. Current approaches to managing radioactive waste have been segregation and storage for short-lived waste, near-surface disposal for low and some intermediate level waste, and deep burial or partitioning / transmutation for the high-level waste. A summary of the amounts of radioactive waste and management approaches for most developed countries are presented and reviewed periodically Nuclear waste epitomizes the double-edged sword of modern technology. It's a toxic and radioactive by product of nuclear medicine, nuclear weapons manufacturing and nuclear power plants. In short, it's the type of waste that reflects one of humankind's greatest leaps in technology, but it also demonstrates our inability to deal with our own advances. Radioactive waste can take the form of different states of matter, including gas, solids and liquids. Depending on the waste's source, the radioactivity can last from a few hours to hundreds of thousands of years. If disposed of improperly, radioactive waste can devastate the environment, ruining air, water and soil quality. What's more, these materials can have long-term negative effects on human health, and can be fatal. The greatest bulk of nuclear waste is related to the generation of nuclear power. There are two primaries by products, including spent nuclear fuel from nuclear reactors and high-level waste (HLW) from the reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel. The reactors in nuclear power plants use fuel in the form of ceramic uranium dioxide pellets that are sealed within metal rods. After the usable uranium is gone from the rods, the rods must be disposed of. But first, the rods are often processed with chemicals to draw out any unused uranium; this results in HLW, which is liquid waste. Then the rods are usually stored in pools of water near the reactor until a permanent location is prepared. As of this writing, there are more than 29,000 tons of spent fuel rods worldwide. In the United States, many of those rods still sit idle near power plants, because there are few permanent disposal sites. Low-level waste (often from hospitals or labs) can often be compacted or incinerated in a container that is subsequently buried a landfill. Intermediate-level waste (reactor components, chemicals and similar wastes), which have higher levels of radioactivity, may be solidified in concrete or bitumen and then buried deep underground.  HLW comprises only a tiny percentage of all nuclear waste but accounts for 95 percent of the radioactivity given off by nuclear waste. For storage, it may be transformed into a glass, which is then sealed inside stainless-steel containers that are entombed far below the Earth's surface at government-approved sites. Sometimes HLW is stored in underground tanks or silos, too. Finding suitable locations for radioactive waste is no easy task. In short, no one wants nuclear waste near their communities, even if it's buried many miles away in a vault in the desert. The proposed Yucca Mountain storage facility, located in Nevada about 100 miles (160.9 kilometers) northwest of Las Vegas, is a good example of the problems associated with nuclear waste disposal. In 2002, U.S. President George W. Bush approved development of the facility, but since then, the project has been challenged by many groups. In 2010, President Obama indicated he would try to put a stop to the project, citing concerns with the long-term stability of the site. Opponents say earthquakes and groundwater flow could penetrate the vault and let radioactive waste escape. Thus, the United States continues to struggle with nuclear waste disposal. Experts say that permanent disposal locations must be created soon, though, or we risk being overburdened with radioactive waste that no one wants. The prevailing opinion of experts in the field of radioactive waste management is that radioactive waste should eventually be isolated from the human environment until it has lost most of its hazard as a result of radioactive decay. The preferred means of achieving this for high level waste and spent fuel is by deep underground disposal. For waste of low activity and short half-life, surface or near surface disposal is the generally preferred approach and it has already been adopted in many countries. Programs to implement the preferred solution for high level waste and spent fuel have been active in many countries for up to two decades but progress has been slow due to failures to obtain acceptance of proposed disposal sites by local communities. A key issue has been concerned with providing evidence that the proposed radioactive waste repository will be safe and that it will provide protection for future generations living nearby. This is a challenging issue mainly because of the long timescales involved. Radioactive waste disposal continues to be high on the political agenda of many countries, and while considerable experience has been obtained in operating repositories sited near the Earth’s surface for low and intermediate level waste, the geological disposal of high level waste and spent fuel has yet to be demonstrated. Nevertheless, tangible progress towards the opening of geological repositories is being made in several countries — such that the first geological repositories can be expected to be operating within the next decade. A key issue in all programs concerned with repository operation and development is the need to demonstrate long term safety and this was the focus of the international conference held in Tokyo More than one hundred repositories of the near surface type are in existence in the world and they account for the main part, by mass and volume, of the disposed radioactive waste. They are used mainly for the disposal of low and intermediate level waste of short radioactive half-life. They vary in quality and some are currently being upgraded to bring them into compliance with modern standards. The approach for designing near surface repository systems to achieve safety is well established. For such systems, compliance with the international radiological protection criteria can be achieved by a combination of engineered barriers and institutional controls to prevent inadvertent intrusion into the waste. This contrasts with the situation at the sites at which large volumes of waste from the mining and milling of radioactive ores or from other industries producing waste containing natural radionuclides have been deposited on the Earth’s surface. At these sites, the radiation exposure of local populations is often in excess of radiation protection limits for members of the public. Because of the large volumes, the practical protection measures which can be taken are limited. International guidance on their safe management is not yet adequate and it was recommended that it should be improved based on, in the first instance, the experience described at the conference The nuclear wastes produced from nuclear power station are classified into three categories (i.e. gas, liquid and solid wastes). The disposal of nuclear wastes is based on the principle of recycling and minimize the release quantities as far as possible. The management of the nuclear wastes must comply with the requirements of the national safety regulations. The release of the nuclear waste is strictly monitored and controlled by the national authority and the actual release is far below the prescribed permissible quantities. Each nuclear power station has its own waste processing facilities to properly treat the gas and liquid wastes generated during daily operation of the plant. The waste treatment process includes filtering, clean-up, storage, decay and dilution depending on the characteristics of the wastes and its radioactivity. When the radioactivity of the waste has diminished to a very low level, it would be released to the environment on condition that it would not exceed the permissible limit. The gaseous waste is released to the environment after treatment via the stack. The liquid waste is mixed and diluted with the effluent from the plant after treatment before discharging to the sea. The nuclear wastes produced from nuclear power station are classified into three categories (i.e. gas, liquid and solid wastes). The disposal of nuclear wastes is based on the principle of recycling and minimize the release quantities as far as possible. The management of the nuclear wastes must comply with the requirements of the national safety regulations. The release of the nuclear waste is strictly monitored and controlled by the national authority and the actual release is far below the prescribed permissible quantities. Each nuclear power station has its own waste processing facilities to properly treat the gas and liquid wastes generated during daily operation of the plant. The waste treatment process includes filtering, clean-up, storage, decay and dilution depending on the characteristics of the wastes and its radioactivity. When the radioactivity of the waste has diminished to a very low level, it would be released to the environment on condition that it would not exceed the permissible limit. The gaseous waste is released to the environment after treatment via the stack. The liquid waste is mixed and diluted with the effluent from the plant after treatment before discharging to the sea. All matters are made up of tiny units called atoms. Every atom has a nucleus which is surrounded by a cloud of electrons. The nucleus consists of uncharged neutrons and positively charged protons. Negatively charged electrons travel around the nucleus in their orbits, similar to the way planets moving around the sun. The numbers of protons and electrons in an atom are normally the same, giving an uncharged atom. The nucleus of the smallest atom - the hydrogen atom, contains only one proton. Whereas those of the bigger ones contain large numbers of protons and neutrons. For example, the carbon-12 nucleus contains 6 protons and 6 neutrons. The uranium-238 nucleus contains 92 protons and 146 neutrons. Nuclei of most atoms are stable (i.e. tend to remain as they are); but some nuclei, in particular, those large ones, are unstable. These unstable nuclei may release particles or electromagnetic waves spontaneously to return to their stable states. This process is called decay. The unstable nuclei are said to be radioactive and called radionuclides. The released particles and electromagnetic waves are called radiation. The stability of a nucleus can be described in terms of a number of parameters. One such parameter is the binding energy of particles inside the nucleus, i.e. the nucleons. The total binding energy of a nucleus is defined as the energy that would be required to separate the nucleus into separate nucleons. In other words, the same amount of energy will be given off when stand-alone nucleons come together to form the nucleus. When the binding energy per nucleon is plotted against the mass number, i.e. total number of protons and neutrons in a nucleus (the bottom right figure), it is found that the curve peaks around the mass number 56, i.e. the iron nucleus. This indicated that total energy of the iron nucleus is the lowest. In term of energy, nuclei larger than that of iron will have a tendency to break up while smaller nuclei would have a tendency to combine to form larger nuclei. Uranium-235 is the fuel for nuclear power stations. It contains 92 protons and 143 neutrons. Because of the unstable nuclei, uranium has a tendency to break up and release a large amount of energy. Non-ionizing radiation contains low energy electromagnetic waves. Common examples of this kind of radiation are ultraviolet, visible light, infrared, microwave and radiowave. Their energy is relatively low, only manages to cause molecules to vibrate and induces heating effects. There are many applications of non-ionizing radiation in our daily life. Using microwaves to cook food and radiowaves to transmit information are examples. We should beware of ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Although it is non-ionizing, exposure to it could cause harmful sunburns. During days with little clouds, we should take protective measures against exposure to UV radiation. Another common example of non-ionizing radiation is ultrasound. It is a very high frequency sound wave and can be used to form ultrasound images for diagnostic treatment. Ionizing radiation includes high speed particles and high energy electromagnetic waves. Their energy is high enough to remove orbital electrons from atoms, thus giving rise to positively charged ions and negatively charged electrons. Apart from x-rays which are emitted by excitation of electron clouds, most of the ionizing radiation come from the decay of unstable nuclei. Neutrons have no charge and are constituents of the atomic nucleus. They are very penetrating and can only be stopped by hydrogen-rich materials, such as water or paraffin. Fast-moving neutrons are produced by fission reaction in a nuclear reactor. Water is commonly used to moderate and control the speed of neutrons Exposure in medical practice, mostly due to diagnostic x-rays, probably contributes the largest fraction of human's exposure to artificial radiation. Fallout of radioactive substances resulting from atmospheric nuclear weapon testing, luminous watches, ionization chambers, smoke detectors, etc. make up the balance Artificial radiation has many useful medical and industrial applications. As it may be harmful to health, a lot of research work has been conducted to ensure maximum protection is given to the users of radiation. As a result, our exposure to artificial radiation is much lower than that to natural radiation. Among the exposure pathways, doses due to diagnostic and radiotherapy treatments contribute the largest share. Patients have to be exposed to radiation during diagnostic imaging, e.g. the x-ray examinations. In imaging of certain organs, some radioactive materials are ingested or injected into the patients. In radiotherapy, dose given to a patient has to be high enough to destroy the tumour. Nuclear power generation is one of the sources of artificial radiation. During the operation of nuclear power stations, traces of radioactive gases or fluid will be discharged to the environment. Transportation and processing of nuclear wastes will also release traces of radioactive materials. These are also sources of artificial radiation. A number of atmospheric nuclear tests took place from 1945 to 1980. Radioactive particulates produced in the explosions dispersed into the atmosphere by the winds and some of them deposited onto the ground. Deposition of these radioactive materials increased the level of artificial radiation in the environment. X-ray emission from vacuum tubes of television and video display units are also sources of artificial radiation. Consumer products, such as radio luminous watches and smoke detectors, also consist of radioactive materials. For information on radiation applications in consumer products, please click here. Radioactive materials used in industry, medical and educational institutions would become wastes one day. The HKSAR Government has taken appropriate actions to treat these radioactive wastes to protect the public from the residual radiation in them. The demand for energy increases with the world's booming population and expanding economy. We are consuming energy at a pace much faster than it can be replenished. Nuclear energy is one of the solutions to meet this ever increasing demand of energy. To date, there are about 440 commercial nuclear power reactors around the world, mainly relying on splitting, or fissioning, of uranium or plutonium nuclei. These reactors generate about 17% of the electricity world-wide. Guangdong Nuclear Power Station and Lingao Nuclear Power Station at Daya Bay are located some 50 km to the northeast of Hong Kong. They began commercial operation in February 1994 and May 2002 respectively. Both stations use pressurized water reactors to generate power for the people of Hong Kong and Guangdong Many of us are aware of the widespread use of radiation in the medical community. It can be used for diagnosis as well as therapy for a number of diseases. In diagnostic treatments, x-rays can provide images for identifying abnormal changes in body organs and tissues. With advanced imaging and computing technologies, a three dimensional picture or animation can be generated to facilitate the diagnostic treatment if radioisotopes are injected or ingested into the patient. The most widely used diagnostic radioisotope is technetium-99m which has a half-life of six hours and releases g rays during radioactive decay. While giving the patient a very low radiation dose, technetium-99m allows sufficient time for the diagnosis process. In therapy treatments, a radioisotope of iodine, iodine-131, is used to treat thyroid cancer. For some cancers, g rays from cobalt-60 sources are used to destroy cancer cells. Irradiating a tumour with ionizing radiation has proved to be effective in inhibiting the tumour's growth or even destroying it. Nowadays, many medical utensils are sterilized by g rays from cobalt-60 sources. This technique is much cheaper and more effective than steam sterilization. Disposable syringe, cotton wool and surgical consumable are good examples. Since it is not a high temperature treatment process, it can be used to sterilize a range of heat-sensitive items such as plastics. In addition, as g rays have very high penetrating power, the sterilization process can be done after the item is packaged. This ensures that the item is free from bacteria before being used. Since the discovery of anthrax-laden mail in US in October 2001, US Government uses x-rays in the same manner as in medical usage to sterilize suspected items sent through mail to avoid panic in the country. Antiquities can be dated by measuring their natural radioactivity. Popular techniques include "carbon-14 dating" and "thermoluminescence dating". They are useful tools in geological, anthropological and archaeological researches. Carbon-14 is produced when cosmic rays bombard the atmosphere. The carbon-14 formed will be oxidized to carbon dioxide and absorbed by plants. Meanwhile, animals will ingest plants and hence most of the organic materials contain a certain amount of carbon-14. As soon as the plants or animals die, the uptake of carbon-14 will cease and the amount of carbon-14 will decrease with time due to radioactive decay. The half-life of carbon-14 is about 5,730 years. By measuring the amount of carbon-14 in the ancient organic materials, we can estimate the time when the organism died. Trace amounts of natural radioactive materials, such as uranium, thorium and potassium with half-lives of up to one billion years, exist in soil. When the inorganic crystal in clay is irradiated by the above radioactive materials, part of the radiation will be released in the form of light and the rest will be trapped in the crystal. When such crystal is heated, the stored energy will be released as light, the so called thermoluminescence effect. Thermoluminescence dating can be used to determine how much time has elapsed since the last time the object was heated. The older the object, the more light will be released. Thermoluminescence dating is commonly used to determine the age of pottery. There are many uses of radioactive materials which improve or facilitate human activities or quality of life of people. These uses are given in different fields of technology, ranging from power generation to supply entire cities or areas, to medical and industrial uses, even the smoke detectors in buildings. All these applications generate radioactive waste that may represent risks to the environment or to human beings, but it is necessary to have special attention to the management of radioactive waste. In this chapter there are information about the generalities of radioactive wastes, such as its definition, origin, classification and stages of radioactive waste management. In addition, there are information about the current state of research and technologies which have been proposed for the treatment of radioactive waste, with their advantages and disadvantages, in special case of the electrochemical techniques to treat radioactive waste with theoretical considerations and cases of study There are many uses of radioactive materials which improve or facilitate human activities or quality of life of people. These uses are given in different fields of technology, ranging from power generation to supply entire cities or areas, to medical and industrial uses, even the smoke detectors in buildings. All these applications generate radioactive waste that may represent risks to the environment or to human beings, but it is necessary to have special attention to the management of radioactive waste. In this chapter there are information about the generalities of radioactive wastes, such as its definition, origin, classification and stages of radioactive waste management. In addition, there are information about the current state of research and technologies which have been proposed for the treatment of radioactive waste, with their advantages and disadvantages, in special case of the electrochemical techniques to treat radioactive waste with theoretical considerations and cases of study. The ultimate goal of waste management lies in its restraint and seclusion of the human environment, for a period of time and under conditions such that any release of radionuclides does not pose unacceptable radiological risk to people or the environment. Management should ensure that all charges are minimal for future generations. A responsible management of radioactive waste requires the implementation of measures aimed at protecting human health and the environment. The basic steps for effective management of radioactive waste are part of a global system, ranging from waste generation to final disposal are: minimization of radioactive waste, pre-treatment, characterization, treatment, conditioning, transport, storage and disposal A management system should to be applied in all steps of radioactive waste management, in order to ensure that activities, facilities, equipment and waste products in meeting the overall safety, health, environmental, security, quality and economic requirements, with safety and environmental protection being of primary importance The wastes must be adequately characterized; chemically, physically, and radiological as a precursor to waste management. The composition of waste should be known with sufficient accuracy that nuclear and conventional safety and environmental protection are not compromised. Toxic or hazardous constituents should be characterized by analytical means or from knowledge of the processes, so that hazards associated with treatment methods of waste can be identified. The reachability of radionuclides, toxic materials and the generation rates for volatile organic compounds or powders and other hazardous gases should be determined. It is important to know the chemical stability of radioactive waste: flammability, corrosively, reactivity, pyrophoricity, rapid oxidation promotion, biodegradability and the chemically incompatible waste forms should be carefully controlled. The amount of mobilizing agents such as chelating compounds, particularly stable ones, should be kept to a minimum. Waste containing hazardous constituents that are mobile in the environment, or constituents that enhance the mobility of radionuclides should avoid. Several possible process options have to be identified for treating radioactive wastes and before selecting it should include a safety analyses. To prefer processes the cheapest and simplest to procure and operate. The best practical environmental options should be selected, with radiation doses and discharges as low as reasonably achievable It is suggested that cheap simple structures will be adequate for installation. personnel protection should be used in installation: protective clothing, rubber gloves, face mask, visors and personal dosimeters. It is necessary to assess the radiation exposure of the operators on the site and to estimate the frequency and consequences of possible accidents related to the facility and the materials which it handles. The waste processing area must to have suitable fire protection systems, adequate ventilation, and for the waste contains liquids a collection sump. It is suggested that cheap simple structures will be adequate for installation. Personnel protection should be used in installation: protective clothing, rubber gloves, face mask, visors and personal dosimeters. It is necessary to assess the radiation exposure of the operators on the site and to estimate the frequency and consequences of possible accidents related to the facility and the materials which it handles; The waste processing area must to have suitable fire protection systems, adequate ventilation, and for the waste contains liquids a collection sump. Chemical precipitation processes are regularly used for removing radioactivity from low and intermediate level aqueous wastes at fuel reprocessing facilities, research laboratories and power stations. Precipitation processes are greatly versatile, relatively low investment and operational costs; and may treat from large volumes of liquid effluents containing relatively low concentrations of active species to those containing large amounts of particulates or high concentrations of inactive salts. However, in some cases, a pre-treatment stage, such as oxidization of organic contaminants, decomposition of complexed species, pH adjustment, change of the valency state or adjust the ionic species, should be applied prior to the formation of precipitate in order to improve the process. Radionuclides can be removed by precipitation, co-precipitation with a carrier or sorption on to particulates present in the waste Ion exchange methods have extensive applications to remove soluble radionuclides from liquid waste produced in nuclear fuel cycle operations, radioisotope production and research facilities. It is very effective at transferring the radioactive content of a large volume of liquid into a small volume of solid. Ion exchange process involves the replacement of cations or anions between an insoluble solid matrix containing ionizable polar groups and a liquid solution. When the ionic groups are negatives the exchange will involve cations and when they are positively charged, they involve anions. The process is selective, stoichiometric and, as a rule, reversible therefore, ion exchangers can be “regenerated” and radioactive liquid waste recovered with high activity content or if the exchangers become “exhausted” they are removed and treated as radioactive wastes. Evaporation process is effective for concentrating or removing salts, heavy metals and a variety of hazardous materials from waste effluent, reducing large volumes of liquid wastes with high factor decontaminations. The process is commonly used for the treatment of high, intermediate and low level waste effluents; in particular for the treatment of small volumes of highly active effluents and may be carried out through the use of commercially available evaporation equipment. However, evaporation has some important limitations: unsuitable for waste effluents containing large concentrations of inactive salts, expensive because its large energy requirement and the presence of some organic compounds can produce explosions during evaporation Distillation is a radioactive waste volume reduction technique used for pre-treating liquid scintillation and miscellaneous solvent waste in conventional equipment. The process is simple, known, and cost effective if the valuable solvent is recycled or reused. The active residue could be either immobilized Distillation is a radioactive waste volume reduction technique used for pre-treating liquid scintillation and miscellaneous solvent waste in conventional equipment. The process is simple, known, and cost effective if the valuable solvent is recycled or reused. The active residue could be either immobilized A wet abrasive-blasting system uses a combination of water, abrasive media and compressed air, and is normally applied in 24 a self-contained, leak tight, stainless steel enclosure. The dry abrasive-blasting technique, commonly called sandblasting or abrasive jetting, uses abrasive materials suspended in a medium that is projected onto the surface being treated, resulting in a uniform removal of surface contamination. The scarification process removes the top layers of a contaminated surface down to the depth of the sound, uncontaminated surface. There are two basic disadvantages with the mechanical methods: the surface of the workpiece has to be accessible and many methods may produce airborne dust Decontamination processes may divide into chemical, electrochemical and mechanical processes presents the particular advantage of homogenising a number of radionuclides in the ingots and concentrating other radionuclides in the slag and filter dust resulting from the melting process, thus decontaminating the primary material. The problem with inaccessible surfaces or complex geometries is eliminated and the remaining radioactivity content is homogenised  present, these materials are safely stored in case there is a need for them in future. If the UK government decides that these materials have no future use, they will reclassify the material as waste. The UK government will make this decision based on economic, environmental and safety grounds. Limiting the generation of waste is the first and most important consideration in managing radioactive wastes. Delay and decay is frequently an important strategy because much of the radioactivity in nuclear reactors and accelerators is very short lived. Concentrating and containing is the objective of treatment activities for longer-lived radioactivity. The waste is contained in corrosion resistant containers and transported to disposal sites. Leaching of heavy metals and radionuclides from these sites is a problem of growing concern. Microorganisms corrode even the high-grade metal containers and solubilize the metal ions. Ferric sulphate formed in situ by the biological oxidation of pyrite In order to reduce the quantities of waste for interim storage and to minimize disposal cost, all countries are pursuing or intend to implement measures to reduce the volume of waste arisings where practicable. Volume reduction is particularly attractive for low-level waste which is generally of high volume but low radiation activity. Significant improvements can be made through administrative measures, e.g. replacement of paper towels by hot air driers, introduction of reusable long lasting protective clothing, etc., and through general improvements of operational implementation The wastes generated at nuclear power plants are rather low in activity and the radionuclides contained therein have a low radiotoxicity and usually a short half-life. However, nuclear power plants are the largest in number among all nuclear facilities and produce the greatest volume of radioactive wastes. The nature and amounts of wastes produced in a nuclear power plant depend on the type of reactor, its specific design features, its operating conditions and on the fuel integrity. These radioactive wastes contain activated radionuclides from structural, moderator, and coolant materials; corrosion products; and fission product contamination arising from the fuel. The methods applied for the treatment and conditioning of waste generated at nuclear power plants now have reached a high degree of effectivity and reliability and are being further developed to improve safety and economy of the whole waste management system. In most technical systems, ion-exchange processes are applied using a fixed bed of ion-exchange material filled in a column which is passed through by the contaminated effluent either from top to bottom or vice versa. The ion-exchange material may be regenerated after having reached saturation of the active groups (break through capacity). Some types of ion exchangers are also removed as waste concentrate to be solidified. Therefore, the ion-exchange process represents a semi continuous process and requires major efforts in maintenance like flushing, regeneration, rinsing, and refilling operations. suspended material. The most important volatile radionuclides, which form gaseous radioactive waste generated during normal operation of nuclear power plants, are halogens, noble gases, tritium, and carbon-14. The composition and the amount of radioactivity present in the various airborne waste streams largely depend on the reactor type and the release pathway. All gaseous effluents at nuclear power plants are treated before discharge to the atmosphere to remove most of the radioactive components from the effluence During the operation of a nuclear power plant, various types of dry solid wastes containing radioactive materials are generated. The nature of these wastes vary considerably from facility to facility and can include redundant items of the reactor plant, ventilation system filters, floor coverings, contaminated tools, etc. Another source of solid waste is the accumulation of miscellaneous paper, plastic, rubber, rags, clothing, small metallic or glass objects, used during the operation and maintenance of the nuclear power plant. As solid radioactive waste at nuclear power plants consists of a broad spectrum of materials and forms, no single technique can adequately treat this waste; a combination of processing techniques is generally used. The basic and most common technique used for processing most voluminous portions of solid waste has been based on compaction. This method reduces the storage and disposal volume requirements by a reasonable amount, but achieves little in terms of improvement of the waste properties from the viewpoint of longer term management Most treatment and conditioning processes for LILW have now reached an advanced industrial scale. Although these processes and technologies are sufficient for effective management of radioactive waste at nuclear power plants, further improvements in this technology are still possible and desirable. The increasing cost of radioactive waste disposal provides an incentive to adopt procedures and techniques to minimize waste quantities and to develop new techniques to minimize volumes at the treatment and conditioning step. It is not possible here to summarize all new developments and improvements which are being made in this direction in Member States. Some examples of such new developments include the use of specific inorganic sorbents to improve liquid waste treatment; use of membrane techniques for liquid waste treatment; dewatering and drying of bead resin and filters slurries; incineration of spent ion-exchange resins; dry cleaning of protective cloth to reduce quantity of laundry drains; use of high integrity containers for packaged dried filter sludges; vitrification of some intermediate-level waste to reduce volumes of waste to be disposed of; and super compaction of unburnable waste. Perhaps not all of these new developments will find broad implementation in waste management technologies, in particular at nuclear power plants. However, the research and development reflects the fact that the nuclear industry and utilities take great care in a safe and economic management of radioactive waste at nuclear power plants, and that improvements in existing technology are foreseen.
